 PiiHicatwns 

of the International Institute of intellectiial Co<-operatioii 

2^ rue de Montpensier^ Paris 


INSTITUTE OF INTELLECTUAL CO-OPERATION, I9*i^0 




MANUAL 


THE CONSERVATION 


PAINTINGS 


ERRATA 


rhis manual was printed in Ihe summer of 1940, iliai is at a critical period of the war 
in ihe circumstances, it was impossible to correct ihe final proof-sheets. Below will 
be found a list of printer's errors and we rety on the indulgence of our readers for those which 
may still have escaped our notice. 


Pa ire 7 
Pag-e 8 
Page 16 
Pages 32 
Page 35 
Page 69 
Page 77 
Page 108 
Page 136 
Page 154 , 
Page 159 
Page 172 
Page 193 
Page 248 
Page 252 
Page 260 
Page 267 
Page 267 
Page 267 
Page 270 
Page 276 
Page 278 
Page 282 
Paa'o 283 


: line 13 — for smokes read smoke. 

: line 21 — for plaking read flaking. 

: line 7 — for easel read easel. 

and 33 : Figs. 2 and 3 should be reversed. 

: line 5 from bottom — for sometime read sometimes. 

: line 3 from bottom — for conditions read condition. 

: line 14 — for improvemenle read improvement. 

: line 6 — for fiedl read field. 

: last line — for surafee read surface. 

: iine< 3 — for phenorneon read phenomenon. 

: line 3 from bottom — for insiances^v^d^nstance. 

: last line — for ayer read layer. \ 

: line 5 — for photrogaph ves.6^f^togjmg^ • 

: line 18 — for afie reai (^ter. \ ^ * 

: line -2 — for \ 

: line 2 — for piciuros r^id piciuhs. 

: line 14 — for museums read museum. 

: line 26 — for radling read cradling. 

: line 30 — for oparations read operations. ■ 

: line 18 — for noiweaus read nouveaux. 

: 3rd. division downwards — for June read Jaune. 

: line 2 from bottom ~ for Cinnaber read Cinnabar. 

: column 5, division 4 from bottom, for Indibofern read Indigofera. 
: line 3 — for ullremarines read ultramarines. 



Contents 



i 

I 



List of illustrations. 

Foreword 

Part one: Conservation. 

Chapter 1. General principles applying to the conservation of paint- 
ings in Museums (1-7) .... . 

Chapter II. — Methods of investigation applied to the examination of 
pictures : A. General methods of examination applied to pictures 
(8-12). B. Special methods of examination applied to pictures (13). 
— I. Methods applied direct to the pictures (14-19). — II. Special 
methods applied to samples taken from pictures (20-25) 

Chapter III. — The surroundings (26-33) 

Chapter IV. — The action of light on paintings (34-39) 

Chapter V. Effects of candle smokes and certain methods of heating 
(40-42) 

Chafer VI. Reactions of the constituent parts of paintings to humi- 
dity and temperature changes (43-46) 

Chapter VII. — Heating and air conditioning (48-55) 

Chapter VIII. — Local protective and precautionary measures (56-64). 

Chapter IX. — Protection against fire (65-83) 

Chapter X. — Transport and packing of paintings (84-91) 

Part Two: Restoration. 


9 

13 


21 


27 

57 

65 

69 

71 

75 

79 

85 

95 


Chapter XI. General principles concerning the restoration of pmnt- 
ings (92-102) 101 




Chapter XII. ■ — Maladies and treatment of the varnish layer (103). — 
A. Composition of varnishes (104-106). — B. Maladies and treatment 
of varnishes ( 107-1 12), — C. Removal of varnishes (113-120). — D. 
Methods of varnishing (121-124). — E. Dulling of varnishes (125-130). 

Chapter XIIL — Maladies and treatment of the paint layer (131-133). 
— A. Composition of the paint layer (134). — 1. Media (135-141). — 
IL Pigments (142-143). — B. Changes in the paint layer : 1. Changes 
due to the structure of the paint layer (144-148). — IL Changes due 
to the support and ground (149-157). — III. Deterioration due to the 
varnish layer (158). — IV. Deterioration due to accidental causes or 
previous interference (159-162). — C. Treatment and restoration (163- 
172). — D. Gold ground, — Gilding (173-175) 

Chapter XIV. — Maladies and treatment of the ground (176-181). . . 

Chapter XV. — ■ Maladies and treatment of canvas. — A. Texture, 
characteristics, properties (182-187). — B. General measures of pro- 
tection (188-193). — C. Care and treatment : I. Local repairs (194- 
195). - II. Relining (196-215). - III. Transfer (216-224) 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 



Pages 


' I. XVI th century Italian painting, photographed by reflected light ' , . . . 2B 

2. Master of the Legend of Magdalen. Photographed by normal light 32 

3. The same painting photographed by oblique light 33 

4. Painting by Cranach . ' 36 

5. Detail of the picture opposite. Example of repaint revealed by enlargement, . . 37 

6. Example of macrophotography applied to the identification of works of art . . . 39 

7. Radiograph of a Dutch painting, XVth century. 4! 

8. Example of underpaint revealed by a radiograph 43 

9. Normal photographic proof of a portion of an early Dutch painting 46 

1 0. Same portion photographed by X-rays 47 

1 1. Detail of the portion shown in the two preceding illustrations, photographed by ultra- 

violet rays. 49 

12. Detail of a Flemish painting, XVlth century, photographed by natural light. . . 53 

13. Same detail photographed by mercury-vapour lamp, without filter 53 

1 4. Cleaning a painting with a swab of cotton-wool wound round a stick 117 

1 5. Detail of a Corot showing, in the uncleaned part of the sky, a cloud effect not intended 

by the artist 119 

1 6. Detail of a Dutch still life. Crackle accentuated by the accumulation of dust, soot, etc. 121 

17. Example of cleaning, showing various stages of the process. . 123 

18. Crucifixion, Xlllth century. Artist unknown (Naples, San Domenico Maggiore). 

Condition of the picture in the early stages of cleaning 125 

19. Detail of a Renoir; accumulation of dark varnish in the hollows surrounding the 

impasto 127 

20. Detail of a Filippino Lippi. The Golden Calf, National Gallery. Deterioration of 

the varnish necessitating cleaning . . 130 

21. Detail of the same Filippino Lippi. Photographed before cleaning . . . . . . . 131 

22. Same detail after cleaning, photographed by natural light . 132 

23. Same detail photographed, by natural light, during cleaning 133 

24. Same detail photographed by X-rays. 134 

25. Same detail photographed by ultra-violet rays. . . . . . 135 

26. Ditto, photographed by infra-red rays . . . . . ... . . . . . 136 

27. Ditto, photographed during cleaning and by reflected light. 136 

28. Electrical apparatus for the treatment of blistering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147 

29. Radiograph of a portion of a XVlth century painting . . . . . ... . . . . . 149 

30. Portion of a Watteau. Example of paint with an excess of oil 159 

31. Method of fixing a loose paint film . . . . . ......... . . . .... 161 

32- Van Gogh, ^^The Subway”, — Particles of loose paint. . . . . ... . . . . 163 



9 



Example of various forms of accidental crackle ' in . 

Detail of aMemling; normal crackle, characteristic of German XVth 
Detail of a Terborch. Characteristic crackle seen in 

ings 

Cranach : Lucretia (Detail). 

Detail of a painting by Orcagi 
Portion of a still life by V. Kalf. 


paint applied to a plate. . . . 

century paintings, 
Dutch XVIIth century paint- 

Crackle characteristic of Cranachs 

fna, showing crackle characteristic of the XIVth century. 
~ Application of photographic enlargement 

39. Still life by Kalf, showing grapes repainted, partially concealed 

40. Example of the transformation of an early painting into a modern portrait with contem- 

porary costume 

41. Condition of the painting after transfer and in the early stages of the stripping of the 

over-paint 

42. Same painting stripped of repaints. 

43. Borghese Gallery, Picture No. 371, before removal of repaints and restoration . 

44. Borghese Gallery, Picture No. 371, after removal of repaints and restoration. . 

45. Louvre Museum : drawing by Raphael, confirming the attribution and apocryphal 

modifications of the previous painting 

46. Bronzino, portrait of a Medici* Condition before cleaning 

47. Radiograph of the hand (detail of the portrait by Bronzino) 

48. Condition during the process of cleaning 

49. Condition after restoration 

50. Small Greek ikon, XVOth century, in which the pulverulence and splitting of the 

priming are evident 

Florentine panel, early XIVth century, showing breaks and splitting. 

52. Splitting and breakmg of the priming of a Venetian panel executed about 1500 . 

53. Crackle in the priming and paint layer, typical of Northern paintings, mid-XVth cen- 

tury . 

54. Result of faulty relining with a size adhesive 

55. Relining of an XVIIIth century portrait 

56. Relining of an XVIIIth century portrait. Enlarged detail of No. 55 .... . 

57. Relining of a Van Gogh 

58. The picture fixed at the edges by strips of stout paper . 

59. Levelling the sawdust bed with a box 

s«^wdu .... 

62. Worm-eaten ^ panel, the back of which has been sawn off, and the surface of which 
showed no signs of deterioration . 


EDITORIAL COMMITTEE 


W. G. Constable, late Director of the Courtauld Institute of Art, London; 
Folch y Torres, Director-General of Museums of Art, Barcelona; Paul Ganz, 
Professor in the University of Basle; J. G. Goulinat, member of the Restoration 
Comnaittee of the National Museums (Paris); A. P. Laurie, former Professor of 
Chemistry, Royal Academy of Arts (London); Emilio LavagniNO, Inspector at 
the Royal Directorate of Galleries and Works of Art, Latium; Jacques 
Maroger, member of the Restoration Committee of the National Museums 
(Paris); S. Ortolani, Director of the Naples Art Gallery; H. J. Plenderleith, 
Professor of Chemistry, Royal Academy of Arts; Keeper, Research Laboratory, 
British Museum; Helmut Ruhemann, formerly Head Curator and Restorer at 
the State Museums, Berlin; George L. Stout, Director of the Laboratory of the 
Fogg Art Museum (Cambridge, U.S.A.); A. Martin de Wild, Restorer (The 
Hague). 

Secretary-General: E. FouNDOUKIDls, 

Secretary-General of the International Museums Office, 

Editorial Secretary: B. Briod, 

Principal Draf ting Secretary at the International Museums Office, 





FOREWORD 


Before we enter upon a practical study of the problems with which this manual 
dealsf it is necessary to recall the circumstances to which it owes its origin and in 
which, it was compiled. In so doings we shall indicate the needs which its authors 
have endeavoured to meet and the particular class of readers to whom it is addressed. 

In carrying through the programme of co'^ordination which it had set out to accom- 
plish, the International Museums Office had, from the very outset, given special 
prominence to the important question of the conservation of works of art. Its 
preliminary investigations, consultations and conversations had clearly revealed 
that systematic studies on this subject were being pursued in many laboratories and 
scientific institutes, but that the problems raised by the upkeep and reconditioning 
of artistic treasures entrusted to the safekeeping of museums could not be solved 
without close international collaboration between savants— physicists and chemists— 
on the one hand, and fine art experts — curators and historians— on the other. It 
was with a view to preparing the ground for such a system of co-^operation that the 
International Museums Office convened an International Conference in Rome, in 
1930, to discuss the scientific methods employed for the examination and conser- 
vation of paintings. The idea of holding this conference had been suggested by two 
members of the Directors* Committee of the Office: M. Daniel Baud-Bovy, President 
of the Swiss Federal Commission on Fine Arts, and Professor Richard Graul, former 
Director of the Art Museum of the City of Leipzig. 

The exchange of views which took place on the occasion of this first contact between 
laboratory experts, museum curators and art historians made it possible to establish 
valuable data regarding certain points and to delimit the spheres in which it was 
desirable to continue the work that had thus been set on foot. Two facts, in parti- 
cular, were definitely confirmed: first, that no scientific research hearing on the 
analysis and conservation of works of art can be successful unless the technician is 
in possession of the facts of style and history which only the art historian can supply; 
secondly, that modern science places at the disposal of curators and art historians 


13 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 

means of investigation and treatment which greatly facilitate the safeguarding of 
an artistic heritage and the enhancement of its value from the museographical stand- 
point as well as from the point of view of the science of the fine arts. 

Among the conclusions of the experts who took In the Rome Conference, which 
Were published in 2 of the Dossiers of the International Museums Office ( 1 ) 
those which directly concern us here relate to the restoration of paintings and to the 
composition of varnishes. The special committee appointed by the Conference to 
make a detailed study of these problems drew up a series of general recommendations 
dealing chiefly with the hygiene of exhibition buildings, the scientific examination 
of works of art before subjecting them to treatment of any kind, and the need for 
entrusting the care or restoration of paintings to a qualified staff or to an approved 
laboratory. For the time being, the committee limited its study of the problem of 
restoration to the question of varnishes. It indicated briefly the qualities and pro- 
perties that should be present in the varnish layer in order that it may efficiently 
fulfil its functions, and suggested the model formulce which could be adopted. To 
give effect to these recommendations, the special committee asked the International 
Museums Office to nominate a small committee whose duty it would be to prepare 
a manual for the guidance of museum directors and of collectors. 

In order that the work of this committee might be adequately prepared, the Inter- 
national Museums Office considered it indispensable to pursue the examination of 
these problems on the basis of the recommendations formulated and in that spirit of 
co-operation so strongly advocated by the Rome Conference. The members of the 
Conference and several other experts afforded the Office the benefit of their conti- 
nuous collaboration, as is shown by the articles which it has since published and which 
are given in the bibliographical references at the end of this volume. This pooling 
of the results of laboratory research and the experience of art curators, combined 
with the data that could be provided by art historians, was still of too recent date 
to yield immediately all the advantages that could legitimately be expected of it. 

This second stage in the preparatory work was of notable assistance to the com- 
mittee of experts who met in Paris in 1933. It was possible to place before them 
definite data, besides the results of actual experiments carried out by the members 
of the committee and other relevant information which the International Museums 
Office had collected from among its collaborators in every country. Equipped with 

(1) Doaments on the conservation oi paintings, Paris, 1933, International Museums Office. 
Report (in French) of the discussions of the committees of experts of the Office, completing the 
recommendations and conclusions contained in this manual. 


I 



14 


T H E CONSERVATION OF PA IN TING S 

this material, the committee was able to draw up a plan for the Manual and, at the 
same time, to specify its scope and purpose. It accordingly agreed upon a detailed 
plan for the work and suggested the points that should be emphasised by the authors 
as well as the supplementary consultations and further collaboration that would 
have to be arranged in order to complete the documentation already assembled by the 
Internahonal Museums Office. The discussions which took plcice at the meetings 
of this committee were also published in the above-mentioned Dossier N° 2. 

Shortly before this committee met, various national fine art departments and 
directors of the leading museums had asked the International Museums Office to 
prepare a short pamphlet for the use of their staffs, setting forth the most important 
practical prmctpl^ to be observed for the rational conservation of works of art in 
museums. The Office was able to meet this request with the help of the material 
which It had collected and the results of the discussions held by its experts. The 
pamphlet was prepared in collaboration with the Paris committee and distributed 
to the various institutions concerned (1). 

The plan of the present manual and the class of readers for whom it is primarily 
designed show clearly that the International Museums Office does not propose to 
limit the work which it has undertaken regarding the conservation of paintings to a 
single publication. In collaboration with its experts, with the laboratories attached 
to the leading museums or fine art departments in the different countries, and with 
the variom ^ucational authorities, it will continue to study the problems relating 
to the technique of painting and the composition and manufacture of colours as sub- 
jects of instruction in fine-art schools. The conservation of paintings cannot, 
indeed, be confined to the upkeep and restoration of works of the past. Present 
and future works must be given that physical quality which will save them from 
deterioration many cases of which are due to faulty composition of the constituent 
Clements of the picture or to inappropriate technique. 

This manual, which, as stated above, is intended essentially to serve as a guide for 
cwators and collectors, should not be regarded as a treatise for the use of restorers 
the upkeep and restoration of works of art~and this point will be repeatedly em- 
phasised in the following pages-are definitely the work of specialised craftsmen, 
work of a delicate character necessitating long preparation and a fairly eclectic 
training, for it irnplies not only a knowledge of history, of styles, of chemistry and 
of physics, but also a technical training and manual skill which cannot be acquired 
without the tuition of qualified masters who have at their disposal the experimental 

(i) See chapter : Practical Recommendations. 


I 



15 


THE CONS ERVATION OF PAINT I N G S 


material to be found only in important museographical institutions. For the last 
few years, therefore, the International Museums Office, has devoted its attention 
to the professional training of restorers and has already collected and published the 
views of experts on this subject, consulting, whenever necessary, the restoration 
schools of some of the larger museums. 

It should be noted that this Manual on the Conservation of Paintings, which 
deals only with easel paintings, is the first of a series which the International Museums 
Office will devote in turn to the various categories of objects of art ( water-colour 
paintings, guazzo, drawings, engravings — sculpture, ceramics,— furniture, textile 
fabrics, — metal objects, glassware, etc.). 

The Editorial Committee, however, considered it highly desirable that the main 
aspects of the problem of mural paintings should be taken up forthwith for the benefit 
of curators who have specimens of this class of paintings in their collections, or who 
may be called upon to ensure their conservation and possibly to supervise their 
transfer. It was in response to this recommendation that the International Museums 
Office decided to publish in Mouseion (Vol. 39-40) the- study which Professor 
E. Lavagnino had written at the request of his colleagues on the committee. The 
Office nevertheless has the intention of publishing, in this series of manuals, a com- 
prehensive study on the problems arising in connection with the protection and 
conservation of mural decoration (frescoes, mosaic, etc.), which will be discussed 
not only from the point of view of the materials used, but also from the standpoint 
of the architectural elements on which they are executed and the setting in which 
they are preserved. 

It may be recalled here that after the international conference which met in Athens 
in 1931, the Office published a comprehensive work on the vast problem of the pre- 
servation of historic monuments. The planning and equipment of museums, which 
must be regarded as an indispensable factor in the rational conservation of works 
of art, also formed the subject of a museographical treatise, based on the proceedings 
of the international conference held in Madrid in 1934. The memoranda submit- 
ted to this conference and the discussions which took place furnished the authors 
of this manual with invaluable material, particularly on such matters as the heating 
and ventilation of museums, exhibition furniture, etc. 

This brief review of the origins of this manual was necessary in order to explain 
the scope and purpose of its various chapters. It is the result of sustained collabo- 
ration between savants, curators and historians and gives a general view of the present 
position of research in all countries into this vast question of the conservation of 
works of art. It is strictly limited to the methods which have proved successful in 


16 


the conservation of pain 


tan g s 


actual practice, it takes into account the most authoritative opinions. It does 

lltu i io be observed by restorers, hut, with 

all the authority attaching to the names of the experts who have collaborated in this 
work, it suggests the principles that should be borne in mind by curators and collec- 
tors wh^re anxious to ensure the most healthy surroundings for their treasures and 
who wish for guidance^ to the expediency or efficacy of the treatment that may 
be squired for the works of art entrusted to their care. 

et, the International Museums Office does not consider that its work, even in 
this special field of the conservation of paintings, is ended by the production of this 
manual, the results of the experiments that are still being carried out will later 
supplement the data contained in various chapters; new methods of treating paint.- 
mgs may prove to be successful; further investigations will serve to clarify a few 
specific points. It will be for the International Museums Office to collect the rele- 
vant documentary material and to publish it, as it has done up to the present, so as 
to keep constantly up to date the available information on a subject which, particu- 
arly in r^ent years, has engaged the attention of all who take a wholehearted in- 
terest in the safeguarding of this inestimable artistic heritage as well as in the quality 
of present-day productions. ^ ^ 

By common consent, the authors of this manual decided that their personal con- 
tribution should remain anonymous, in order to make quite clear the collective cha- 

ZllZ/ A nip responsibility of all for the opinions ex- 

pr^sed. A full list of the names of the numerous collaborators, outside the com- 
mittee, who have renderM invaluable assistance in the compilation of the volume 
aM of the studies which they have communicated to the International MuseurrI 
Ujjicet lOul be f ound in the bibliographical appendix. 

Finally, the International Museums Office wishes to express its gratitude to the 
members of the Editorial Committee for their valuable and disinterested collabor- 
ation, as well as to all the museum curators, collectors, scholars and technicians who 
have so generously contributed to one or other of the chapters of this work 


E. FOUNDOUKIDIS. 


17 


2 





CHAPTER I 


GEIERAL PRINCIPLES APPLYING TO THE CONSERfATION OF 
PAINTINGS IN MUSEUMS 

As the writer of the, foreword points out, this Manual is intended chiefly for 
curators of museums, to serve as a guide in the choice of methods for the conser- 
vation of the works in their keeping. The curator is not necessarily a profes- 
sional restorer, but he must be in a position to check the work of the specialist 
to whom he has entrusted a picture. In other words, he must have some idea 
of the general principles underlying restoration. He is usually neither a pro- 
fessional architect nor an engineer, but he must be able to satisfy himself that 
the conditions of the premises where the pictures are hung are quite suitable 
for the effective conservation of these objects. These two points will be dis- 
cussed in a very general way in the present chapter and studied in detail in the 
two parts of the Manual entitled ^'Conservation” and “Restoration”. 

The conservation of works of art in museums may be studied by following 
them from the time of their acquisition to the stage when they are hung. 

1. — As soon as the picture arrives, its state of conservation should be scru- 
pulously examined by the methods set out in the following chapter. Should 
deterioration, retouching or repainting be revealed, very delicate questions crop 
up that involve not only material study but quasi-moral considerations. In 
connection with these questions, the curator must have a very clear idea of the 
importance, requirements and significance of any picture exhibited in a gallery. 

A work of art that takes its place in a collection of some importance thereby 
assumes a certain scientific and social significance that any curator should make 
it his duty to encourage to the fullest extent of his competence and conscience. 
This means that every operation performed on the picture must be conditioned 
by scrupulous honesty with regard to the scholars who will refer to the work 
and the public who also can be very exacting as to the genuineness of what is 
put before them. Every art gallery director and every restorer knows how 
difficult it is to carry out this twofold task. And instead of compromising be- 


21 


THE C 0 N S E R V A T I ON 0 


tween scientific pimctllionsness — which would treat a master s work as though 
it were a biological culture — and the requirements of visitors— who go to the 
museum to look at works that are complete and alive — ^the curator will sometimes 
choose the simpler course of distinguishing between ” public and scientific 
works. But setting up a study collection and a public collection cannot by any 
means account for every case, just as the public cannot be divided into the mi- 
tiated and the profane. And the curator who respects his social responsibilities 
wants as many people as possible to avail themselves of the treasures in his 
museum. 


General Principles. 

2. — These seemingly contradictory requirements have, however, one point 
in common when it is a case of restoring a deteriorated picture — the aesthetic 
aspect or the “effect” of the picture. An art historian may, in a different way 
from the uninitiated spectator but nevertheless to a considerable extent, be put 
off in the appreciation of his senses or even the judgment of his intelligence, by 
a patch of deterioration on a painting. We must here establish a distinct differ- 
ence between gaps in a painting and mutilations in sculpture. The absence of 
an arm or a head — to mention only specially famous instances — does not neces- 
sarily destroy the effect of a statue. The eye often supplies the missing part 
Vithout difficulty, or even dispenses with it and experiences no more discomfort 
than it would before a sketch that suggests more than it expresses. On canvas 
or wood, on the other hand, the missing element is a positive factor with colour 
and shape that can be made up for by the imagination only with the very greatest 
difficulty. 

3. — What should the restorer do in such a case ? Several methods have been 
advocated. The most scientific, and also the most elementary, consists in 
choosing a neutral tint that matches the surrounding colour to cover the bare 
patch on the support. Carrying the method somewhat further, it has sometimes 
been thought advisable to extend the design over the defective area, using one 
or two colours that match the surrounding paint but without adding any con- 
tours. Then there were advocates — fewer and fewer nowadays — of complete 
restoration. Between these extremes, there is, of course, a whole series of 
methods and it would be rash to choose any one of these, as there are three fun- 
damental points to be taken into account — the importance of the work, the 


22 



position of the deteriorated patch on the subject and the skill of the restorer. 
In other words^/it must be realised that each case has its special treatment and 
that no cut-and'-dried doctrine holds good for all. Generally speaking, more 
tact is needed when the work is that of a master; although for such works there 
are often sketches and studies available to act as a reliable guide for the restorer. 
If the deterioration is localised or away from the principal subject, the picture 
may be completed, without incurring too many risks, either scientific, or aesthetic. 

4« — In conclusion, it may be said that any form of restoration, backed up of 
course by full scientific knowledge, should enable the spectator to look at the 
work without being distracted by any definite addition, though the restoration 
should be visible under scrupulous examination. Another practical point — 
restoration should always be carried out with materials that can be removed at 
any time by means of a substance which does not attack the original painting. 
Lastly, under no pretext should a fragment, however small, of the original paint 
ever be covered in retouching. 

These technical precautions and the safety measures that precede any kind 
of restoration (photographic records, analysis of pigments, binding media, etc.) 
are dealt with in separate chapters of this manual. 

We would mention here, however, that, apart from the records in document 
form that should accompany any kind of restoration, whenever a work of art 
has undergone treatment, the fact should be regularly mentioned in the scien- 
tific catalogue of the museum. Whenever such treatment distinctly changes 
the character of the picture, as compared with its previous aspect, this fact 
might also be mentioned in the short catalogue. In a popular guide to the 
museum, such an indication would naturally be superfluous. 

The general idea is not to arouse the mistrust of the public by systematically 
hiding the real condition of a picture; the other extreme is equally to be avoided, 
for the uninitiated might easily make unpleasant generalisations and jump to 
the conclusion that the gallery contains no truly genuine pictures. 

5« — Retouching and repainting of a later date than the original work raise 
problems of technique and style much the same as those created by deterior- 
ation or gaps. When such treatment has been revealed by scientific examin- 
ation, the curator must decide just how far the picture that has been retouched or 
‘‘improved” must be restored to its original state. Here again there are no 
stock recipes, as everything depends on the nature and extent of the repainting 


23 


THE* CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 



the, degree to which it has altered the original and (the most important point) 
the curator’s ability , to estimate the advantages and risks of removing it. All 
these points should be cleared up before any action is taken. The question of 
gaps needed the combined skill of the restorer and the art historian* but the 
latter’s advice becomes a sine qua non when a decision has to be made on whether 
retouching should be removed or left. A scientific examination will show how 
far the underlying paint is capable of standing the operation and the curator 
and the expert will have to form their own judgment, taking into account the 
risks that might be incurred and the advisability of the treatment. It is here 
more than ever essential to keep records of the various stages of development 
of the work, before, during and after treatment (1 ). Other repairs or operations 
that may be necessary are more obviously of practical interest only and will be 
dealt with in the chapters on technique. This does not mean that problems of 
cleaning, the removal of varnish and re'-varnishing, whole or partial transfer, 
re-lining and other methods of strengthening can ever be tackled purely mate- 
rialistically. All these operations may not only alter the appearance of the 
picture but may often involve risks of which the restorer should make it his duty 
to inform the curator. 


6. — The restorer has another duty to fulfil, even when the picture does not 
call for immediate treatment. Acquainted as he is with the various inter- 
reactions of the elements that make up a picture, he should be asked by the 
curator to draw up a diagnosis of the state of conservation and resistance of the 
pictures hung In the gallery and define the right atmospheric conditions to keep 
the works protected from subsequent deterioration. Periodical inspection of every 
collection is essential. Visits of inspection should be more frequent in the 
case of works that are specially threatened and should take place regularly at 
the change of season, when the heating is turned off or on, for instance. 


7. — This question of the hygiene of the premises needs very special attention 
by the curator. At the request of numerous Fine Art Administrations, the 
International Museums Office once drew up a circular describing in detail the 
more urgent steps to be taken to protect paintings from the risks of all kinds to 
which they are exposed in an art gallery. These recommendations, which are 


(1) A method that has been tried out in the central restoring studios in Moscow (see Momeion^ 
Vol. 27-28, pp. 228 et seq.) would seem, in the case of certain ikons, to enable the different layers 
removed during the freeing of the bottom layer to be conserved. 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


reprodoced in the Appendix to the present volume, form a sort of vade-mecum 
for the use of curators and their staffs. 

It may be objected that not every museum possesses the means and equipment 
to carry out to the letter every operation required for the rational conservation 
of pictures. Yet even under the most unfavourable practical conditions — de- 
fects in the building, primitive heating system, unhealthy climate,, and so on — 
there are a whole series of precautions that may be taken in order to remedy 
these disadvantages to some extent, if the action of external agents on the ele- 
ments that make up the picture be accurately known. It has been one of the 
objects of the authors of the present manual to offer the curator a detailed account 
of the structure of pictures, as revealed by the most up-to-date discoveries of 
experimental technique, so that he may be able to decide for himself the best 
methods of preserving his collections in the premises at his disposal and with 
the means of cleaning, heating, ventilating and lighting provided by the design 
and equipment of his museum. 

It is obvious that, the more rudimentary his installation, the more carefully 
must the curator attend to the hygiene of his premises and acquaint his staff 
with all the precautions required to avoid accidents, such as too brutal venti- 
lation, draughts, over-heating, method of cleaning the floors and so on. On 
the other hand, the most perfectly fitted out museum demands careful super- 
vision, especially in the case of works just acquired. For the question of climate 
and acclimatisation — and the point cannot be over-emphasised— is of vital 
importance to the ‘‘health” of any work of art. Modifications in the hygro- 
metric conditions — for this is what a change of climate amounts to are the 
most responsible factor of deterioration. It will be seen later in this work that 
there exist optimum standards for the effective conservation of pictures, but 
just as the human organism is in danger when suddenly transferred to a climate 
which is quite healthy from the medical point of view but quite different from 
the one it is used to, so pictures that have been exposed for a long time to a very 
damp or very dry climate suffer serious damage when suddenly removed to 
even a normal climate. The curator will therefore endeavour, as far as possible, 
to obtain accurate information on the antecedents of the work he acquires, in 
order to get it gradually accustomed to the climate of the district and the pre- 
mises. For this purpose, if he has no equipment for air-conditioning, he will 
choose one of the rooms in his museum that offers the most suitable conditions. 
Steps to be taken for the transport of pictures or for temporary exhibition 
(which raise similar problems) will be studied in a special chapter. 


25 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


The same precautions must of course be taken when a new heating plant is 
installed. Whatever system is chosen, the change will necessarily entail new 
hygrometric conditions and the curator must study ways of smoothing over the 
change as far as possible. To do this, he may make tests on works of less value, 
which the restorer will be asked to watch over a period that must be fairly long. 

sii 

These considerations and recommendations are naturally not exhaustive. 
We merely wished to indicate the right attitude towards methods of preserving 
irreplaceable documents and to draw the curator’s attention to the points that 
require his special help in this work of preservation, his professional responsi- 
bility being at stake. 


CHAPTER II 


METHODS OF INVESTIGATION APPLIED 
TO THE EXAMINATION OF PICTURES 


General Principles^ 

8« — An easel painting consists of a series of layers of different materials, all 
more or less intimately fused together: varnish, picture-layer, ground and sup- 
port (panel or canvas); and each of these layers may, under a well-conducted 
examination, afford information which is important to an understanding of the 
nature, origin and condition of the work. 

From the museum point of view, methods of examination fall Into two cate- 
gories : 

A) Those methods which can be applied within the gallery at small expense 
by the curator; 

B) Those methods which require more specialised equipment and the ser- 
vices of a technical equipment. 

Such a differentiation is obvious and necessary but insufficient without further 
qualification because, although in the first category there are processes (such 
as photography by infra-red radiation) which might be applied, they have no 
place in the general examination. And It must be obvious that, from the point 
of view of the collection, a systematic method of recording the main features 
of a picture is likely to be of infinitely more value than isolated observations of 
a more specialised character. 

The present chapter has been planned therefore in accordance with what it 
is considered should be the requirements of the curator: a) to have guidance 
in the method of carrying out a routine survey of a painting, and b) to have suffi- 
cient data before him regarding specialised methods, which are outside his 
normal routine but which may be invoked in order to answer some particular 
question concerning the painting or its structure. These specialised methods 
are always subservient to his researches and are only applied when occasion 


27 



THE CON S E R V ATION OF PAINTINGS 



1. XVITH CENTUBY ITALIAN PAINTING PHOTOGRAPHED BY REFLECTED LIGHT; THE DETAILS OF 
THE FIGURES ARE INDISTINCT BUT SURFACE TEXTURE (BLISTERS, ETC.) IS STRONGLY EMPHASISED. 


demands. They, in turn, can be subdivided into methods which can be applied 
direct to the picture and those which can only be applied to samples taken from 
the picture. 

Finally, one cannot over-stress the importance of collecting the results to- 
gether on a standard record-card or case-sheet which is available for Immediate 
reference and comparison of data. The accumulation of systematic records 
is not only of immediate utility but of historical importance. 

As an example of the variety of useful information which can be established 
by simple means, one could not do better than refer the reader to the Record 



Card drawn up by the American Association of Museums (1), to the Information 
Card used by the Schlesisches Museum fur bildende Kiinste, Breslau (2), and that 
which was suggested for adoption by the Swedish museums (3). 

It goes without saying that to complete such a technical report in the case of 
any one picture would require the co'-operation of more than one specialist^ but 
its completion is seldom necessary. The curator will generally be content with 
something less ambitious, though, from his point of view, not necessarily less 
valuable, and it will give him , satisfaction in proportion to the care he expends 
in his examination and in the accurate description of his observations. 

The record will naturally be of importance when restoration becomes neces- 
sary, and, indeed, when a valuable painting requires the attention of a restorer, 
no cleaning, preventive or curative measures are embarked upon without consi- 
dering the history of the picture as furnished in the technical description. Be- 
fore any treatment is applied, the existing notes should be brought up to date 
and supplemented if necessary by sketches or photographs. 


(1) See A Museum Record of the Condition of Paintings, Technical Studies, VoL 3, 1934-35, 

X 200-216. 

(2) See Mouseton, VoL 20, pp. 23-25. 

(3) See Mouseion, VoL 25-26, pp. 220-225. 


A. GENERAL METHODS OF EXAMINATION 
APPLIED TO PICTURES 


Preliminary Survey* — Examination by the naked eye* ' 

9* — The question of lighting is of the first importance in all forms of optica! 
examination. Standard conditions of light assist the eye to appreciate and 
Interpret detail Quality, intensity and direction of illumination are all of 
importance. 

Preliminary examination is usually conducted in a strong (natural or artificial) 
daylight, and this provides information as to the general condition of the picture. 
Direct sunlight is even more effective in this respect, and it often reveals more 
to the unaided eye than examination in a poor light, even with the help of magni- 
fiers. 

With the old adage in mind that ‘‘a picture cannot reflect more light than it 
sees”, one places the easel so that oblique rays entering through the window 
strike upon the painting from the greatest expanse of sky, leaving room for the 
observer intermediately. The orientation is important, and the effect of various 
adjustments in this respect should be examined. 

If a daylight lamp be employed, it should be of such a nature as to provide an 
intense beam adjustable in any direction. 

The general condition of the picture having been assessed and recorded, the 
next step is to examine the surface in detail under three distinct conditions of 
lighting. Auxiliary artificial illumination will be required for this part of the 
investigation, which may be carried out conveniently in the photographic studio. 

1. Normal Lighting : Light rays at right angles to the surface of the picture 

(Fig. 2). 

2. Oblique Lighting : Light rays incident at about 45® from one side of the 
painting (Fig. 3). 

3. Tangential Lighting : hight rays striking the picture at a very oblique angle, 
throwing into the highest relief all surface unevenness, brushwork, etc. This 
method often shows at once the position of stoppings and retouchings (Fig. 1). 

In each of these three cases, the observer is assumed to be stationed immedia- 
tely before the painting. In the second case, he may be able to see more surface 
detail by standing in the path of the reflected light (Fig. 1). 


30 


THE C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N 0 F PAINTINGS 


When studies , are carried out according to this routine, facts emerge which 
enable the curator to decide upon what further general investigation is required. 
This, indeed, is the main object of the preliminary examination. 

As the work proceeds, one naturally makes photographic records and sketches 
of the salient features, under the conditions which show them to best advantage. 

For these studies, it is desirable to equip one end of the studio with lamps 
which can be adjusted to the standard positions in accordance with the three 
systems mentioned, and the photographer is then called upon as required. A 
note of the exact lighting conditions must in all cases accompany observations and 
photographs. 

It is perhaps not sufficiently appreciated that the appearance of light and 
shade on the surface of an oil painting can sometimes be completely reversed 
by changing from normal to oblique illumination. This point is well illustrated 
in Figs. 2 and 3. 

Subsidiary Aids, in making a General Survey of a Picture* 

Use of Magnifiers. Varying the Intensity of Light. 

10. — Smaller areas are studied only in their relation to the picture as a whole, 
and it follows that the use of magnifying apparatus must be considered as sup- 
plementary to the preliminary examination. If a further reason is required, it 
is that comparisons by the unaided eye are instinctive, whereas with optical 
equipment a certain familiarity is essential if the personal factor is to be so far 
eliminated as to yield results which are easily interpreted. 

The stronger the magnifier the smaller the field of view, the nearer it is to 
the painting when focused, and the more intense must be the lighting. But 
the light must not be too intense or there will be a loss of detail. 

One of the best types of lamp for studying small fields is the Leitz Monla 
lamp, provided with a condensing lens and a carrier for colour filters. This 
operates at 6 volts 5 amperes and may be overloaded to 6 amperes without risk 
of blowing. Possible damage by heat rays can be guarded against by keeping 
the lamp at some distance from the picture, ensuring that the condenser is 
adjusted for parallel rays and limiting the time of exposure. When the rays 
must be focused on a tiny area of paint, one introduces a special glass screen 
between the lamp and the picture in order to filter off the heat rays. 

The actual type of magnifier may now be considered. Low magnifications 
are of most general utility. Magnifying spectacles are sometimes used, but 


31 



2 . MASTER OF THE EEGENB OF 
M A G B' A E E N, FHOTOGR APHED 
IN NORMAE light; BLISTERS 
ARE NOT APPARENT UNDER 
THIS LIGHTING. 



J 



there can be no doubt that the handiest equipment consists of a senes of double- 
lens magnifying glasses which yield a flat field of view. The following gives 
some indication of the features which can be recognised on the picture and of 
the subjects which can be studied under low magnifications : 

Lenses magnifying X 2- X 3 diameters : Small details, brush-work, signatures, etc. 

Lenses magnifying X 6- X 10 diameters: Detection of fine retouches; examination 
of the pureness of craquelure, etc. (As is well known, one of the most frequent 
questions in examining pictures is as to whether the original craquelure is covered 

by later painting or not). i -i 

A lens of X8 diameters is very useful for studying framed pictures whilst on 
exhibition; the glass of the picture-frame prevents one from getting near enough 
to use a stronger lens. 

Magnifications o/xl0-Xl5 diameters: Used for studying superimposed layers 
of paint, depth of craquelure, etc. 

For observations up toX30 diameters, binocular magnifiers have a number 
of advantages : they do not cause eye-strain; they give a larger field of view and 
they present objects in their natural relief. It is also a material advantage for 
those not ordinarily engaged in microscopic work that the image presented is 
neither inverted nor left-and-rlght reversed. 

Magnifications o/x20-X30 diameters: Used for studying odd particles of 
pigment, etc. A rigid support for the binocular is required when studying 
objects above X 10 diameters, and for work on pictures the most convenient 
form of stand is one which will allow of angular adjustment of the binocular 
from the vertical to the horizontal position. Absolute rigidity is essential if the 
camera is to be used with the binocular to record Interesting features as they 
are discovered. A special camera of light weight can be obtained to clamp on 
to one eye-piece of the binocular (e.g. the Leitz “Lukam camera). 


Photographic Records. 


11 . - It is sometimes argued that photographic enlargement from small 
negatives gives results which are quite as satisfactory as those obtained by direct 
enlargement. This Is found, in practice, not to be the case. Better and clearer 
pictures are obtained as follows: 

1. Low magnifications (belowXlO diameters). An enlarged picture is made 
using a suitable lens in an ordinary camera having bellows which allow of ade- 
quate extension. 


T H, E c Q N S E R V A T ! 0 N OF P A INTI N G S 


^ 2. Higher magnifications (over X 10 diameters). The camera is used in coH'- 
junction with the binocular microscope, as above described. 

^ The first method should be adopted for the general detailed study of passages 
m a painting when this is necessary. A series of full-size photographs (i.e. the 
size of the passages in the actual picture) should be prepared. The experienced 
student has learned to appreciate the value of being able to settle comfortably 
in tTO calm^ surroundings of the study, and to scrutinise these full-size photo- 
graphs at leisure in an atmosphere free from the distracting influences of studio 
lights and the awkward poses so often called for during the preliminary inves- 
tigation. 

It would be out of place here to enter further into the methods of ordinary 
photography as applied in the general survey. It is a commonplace that a good 
^otographer can record more detail on a photographic plate than the eye sees. 
He can emphasise or suppress details by his choice of plate or filter or by the 
adjustment of his lighting or focus, and it is essential, therefore, that he should 
be given guidance as to what facts are of importance, so that he can produce a 
good photograph of the particulars which it is desired to study. 

* 

The general examination should cover not only the picture but also any rein- 
forcements which are applied to the back (stretcher, cradling, wedges, buttons, 
etc.). It may be well worth while to measure, sketch and even photograph the 
back of a panel of complicated construction, because it sometimes happens that 
peculiarities of surface craquelure or blistering can be correlated with cracks in 
the wood panel (seen from the back) or with parts of the actual cradling which 
have seized or warped and, in consequence, have become a source of danger to, 
the picture-layer. 


Special cases : Dull and shiny surfaces. 

12. — One of the difficulties often encountered during the examination of a 
^ *1®*^*^® P^tt obscured by an accumulation of surface dirt. 

This may sometime be removed by very careful rubbing with a silk hand- 
kerchief. Pictures vary so in composition and in the stability of their various 
layers that it would be rash in the extreme to attempt to generalise on methods 
of surface cleaning. The curator would be well advised to refrain from attemp- 
ting to modify the surface in any way without consulting the restorer. Even 


35 



4. PAINTING BY CRANACH, AN ENLARGED DETAIL OP WHICH IS GIVEN OPPOSITE. 





5 . ENLARGED DETAIL OF THE CRANACH OPPOSITE. EXAMPLE OF REPAINT (HAIR AND VEIL) 
REVEALED BY ENLARGEMENT, THE HAIR HAS BEEN LENGTHENED IN A LATER REPAINT AND 
THE VEIL, PAINTED OVER THE HAIR, DID NOT EXIST IN THE ORIGINAL PICTURE, 



THE CONSERVATION 


0 F P A I N TING S 


turpentine, which is usually regarded as ' innocuous, may sometimes be detri- 
mentah The common habit of using moisture (even saliva!) for making part of 
the picture (e.g.a signature) more visible may easily result in blooming the varnish 
or even in causing more serious decay. 

In consequences of this kind, where sinking-io, dullness or any other change 
of surface conceals important data, the painting will have to be cleaned, but in 
accordance with the ■ recommendations given in the chapter devoted to this 
question. And if it is decided that cleaning is necessary and desirable, it should 
be conducted with the assistance of a specialist. A photograph of the picture, 
taken through this dirt, is sometimes possible by the infra-red process. 

An equally common obstacle in studying paintings is the shiny varnished 
surface which reflects too much light (‘‘glare”). It is no solution of the pro- 
blem of glare to recommend modifications in the direction of lighting, because 
the positions of lamps, etc., as we have seen, are regulated by the routine of the 
examination. Variations in intensity may, however, improve conditions. 
Where a certain modification of colour is not significant, it is possible to cut out 
most of the glare by introducing a depolarising screen (“Polaroid” screen, 
“Bernauer” equipment, etc.). It must be stated, however, that such screens 
cut off much of the light, so that although they certainly afford a striking im- 
provement in appearance, their use is limited. (See § 162). 


38 



6. EXAMPLE OF MACROPHOTOGRAPHY APPLIED TO THE IDENTIFICATION OF WORKS OF ART. 
ENLARGEMENT OF THE NOSE OF “TITUS” (REMBRANDT, 1652 ), ADDED TO A FRAGMENT (BELOW 
ON THE EIGHT) ALSO ENLARGED, OF THE SHOULDER AND ARM OF “THE ADULTERESS” (REM- 
BRANDT, 1644 ). THE SIMILARITY OF BRUSH-WORK IS CLEARLY SHOWN BY THIS COMPARISON, 

DOCUMENT PREPARED BY PROFESSOR A. P. LAURIE. 


SPECIAL METHODS OF EXAMINATION APPLIED TO PICTUIES 


Characteristics of special methods* 

13* — A purely arbitrary line is drawn between the general and the special 
methods of investigation* determined by the fact that* important as they are* 
some limit must be set to the routine observations which are regarded as a 
minimum necessity in the care of each picture. Having completed the general 
record* the observer may wish to carry bis studies further. 

Where the photographic studio is equipped with tungsten lamps* for example* 
there is the possibility of using the infra-red constituent of this light for the 
photographs of an appropriate subject* as described later. But having regard 
to the specialised nature of the information afforded by investigations of a purely 
scientific nature, the curator will be more concerned to learn of possibilities 
and of the facts which special methods of examination are likely to disclose* than 
to be burdened with the intricate technical details of scientific manipulation. 

Having discovered, from the results of general examination, whether there 
are any important points outstanding which still require elucidation* it then 
becomes necessary to select from the many special methods of the physicist and 
chemist, a process likely to afford the desired information. 

Such methods may be broadly classified as follows: 

I. Methods applied direct to the picture (Photography by X-rays, ultra-violet 
rays or infra-red rays. Colorimetry, crystal structure analysis and microscopy). 

IL Methods applied to samples taken from the picture (Microscopic studies of 
materials. Chemical and spectrographlc analysis. Refractive index deter- 
minations). 

1. — Methods applied direct to the picture 

X-Rays. 

14. — Visual examination: Radiology, — When X-rays are passed through a 
painting in a darkened room, they are in part absorbed by the constituents of 
the various layers of the picture, and when the emergent rays strike a fluorescent 
screen a shadow-reproduction is observed on the screen, which looks somewhat 
like a photographic negative. This is the method of ‘‘screening” or radiology. 
The image has often something of the character of the original picture, only 
with greater contrasts. The reason is that the lighter portions of the picture 


40 



7 . RADIOGRAPH OF A XVTH CENTURY DUTCH PAINTING, SHOWING THE FIBRES OF THE WOOD 
AND THE HARMONY BETWEEN THE FIRST WHITE-LEAD MODELLING AND THE PAINTING ITSELF. 


THE , CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


are generally In white lead, often, painted thickly, and white lead stops the rays 
and so is,' reproduced on the fluorescent screen as a dark patch, 

' The Radiograph or Shadowgraph, — When a ' photographic plate (or film) 
is substituted for the screen, the process is known as radiography. This se'nsi- 
tised surface is affected by the rays passing through all the layers of the picture 
and not least by the pigments themselves. The image thus reproduced affords 
a permanent, record of the skeleton of the paint-layer of the picture, upon which 
is superimposed any feature of the under-layers which is sufficiently charac- 
teristic (dense enough) to be recorded. Retouches, being mostly of thinner 
print, do not generally show up in the shadowgraph, except sometimes as a 
light veil. So if some visible portion of the picture does not show up on the 
shadowgraph, it is to be considered whether it may possibly be a later addition. 
The greatest caution is, however, necessary in attempting to draw conclusions. 
Even the most experienced radiologists will not always be able to decide whether 
such an addition may not, in fact, have been made by the original artist 
himself. 

Again, an original sketch on the ground which does not correspond with the 
painting is sometimes discovered by X-ray photography. It may be impossible 
to decide by the X-ray method alone whether the artist was himself responsible 
for the lack of correspondence between painting and sketch, or whether the 
superimposed painting was actually the work of some later hand. The inter- 
pretation of radiograms of paintings is still in an early stage of development, 
but it has already led to many discoveries. It is occasionally found that a 
canvas or panel -painting has been completely over-painted, and steps have 
been taken to remove the surface layers without considering all the possibilities, 
in the hope of revealing a greater masterpiece, but not always with justification, 
as events have proved. (See Figs. 24, 46-49). 

There is perhaps a tendency today to overrate the usefulness of X-rays in 
researches of fine art, the difficulty of Interpretation being insufficiently appre- 
ciated. But as to the value of the method in skilled hands and with appropriate 
apparatus (giving soft rays of the order of 20 KV or less), there can be no ques- 
tion; it provides a potential source of securing information which might other- 
wise never come to light. This much has been established by exhaustive tests : 
that the picture itself suffers no deterioration by the radiations. 


42 






: Ultra-violet Rays« 

i:!' : ^ 15. — One of the most convenient sources of ultra-violet rays is tlie Hgli- 

pressure seif-starting electronic discharge-tube of quartz giving a mercury arc® 
llfl; :'.'' ^ which operates in any position. This instrument emits a large variety of ra- 

'i'j,; diations visible and Invisible, and all of these, except the ultra-violet rays, are 

shut off by interposing some special kind of filter. The commonest form of 
filter is a dark glass (Wood’s screen), the, emergent rays being then almost 
'invisible. These are the so-called ultra-violet rays, and they have the property 
of causing certain substances to appear fluorescent when examined before the 
lamp in a darkened room: thus, varnishes usually appear brightly fluorescent, 
'^1 whilst binding media and pigments often glow in different colours, and this 

gives an indication of their distribution on the painting. 

How used, — As a preliminary, the picture is inspected in the rays of the 
screened ultra-violet lamp, preferably after the eyes have had a few minutes to 
become accustomed to the darkness of the room, and during the examination 
a daylight lamp may be switched on occasionally for purposes of comparison. 
If the painting shows by a differential fluorescence of the surface that there are 
facts worthy of permanent record, such as a repainted passage or signature which 
fluoresce characteristically, a photograph may be taken in the darkened room 
by ultra-violet illumination; it is usually found that an ultra-violet photograph 
I (luminogram) records fluorescence effects with even greater contrast than seen 

J| by the naked eye (Figs. 11, 12, 25). 

fi Special problems for which suited: 

y Differentiating painting materials (materials which are of similar appearance 

I by daylight may appear quite distinct under ultra-violet illumination, e.g, white 

/ lead is light grey, while zinc-white appears yellowish). 

'|ij Revealing stoppings and over-paintings. 

■ Studying the impurities (foreign materials) in craquelure. 

H Showing the extent of mould growths. (Fungi often fluoresce brilliantly). 

Helping to read labels normally illegible. 

Revealing finger-prints. 

Limitations and precautions. — The commonest difficulty is the masking effect 
; of a fluorescent varnish, and when there is an appearance as of a white veil over 

: the picture, it may be necessary to have the varnish removed before any of the 

characteristic fluorescence of the painting can be seen. 


44 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


The lamp may be used unscreened for photography if a suitable filter is 
introduced into the lens system of the camera. 

When unscreened, the lamp has a considerable heating effect. It is advisable, 
on this account, to speed up the photography by using the largest stop which 
the subject allows and hypersensitive plates in the camera. 

Avoid any unnecessary exposure of the skin to the rays, and protect the eyes 
by glass goggles when examining a light-coloured subject. 

Interpretation of results, — It is important to remember that a luminogram 
is primarily a record of surface effects which may be due to traces of material 
— not necessarily to the principal constituents of the picture. A surface soiled 
by dust or grease may fluoresce comparatively brilliantly; hence the occasional 
appearance of finger-prints (old as well as modern) and peculiar effects due to 
contamination of various kinds. 

The luminogram must be studied alongside the original painting and, in 
doubtful cases especially, every possibility probed before a reliable interpretation 
is attainable. An ultra-violet photograph is very useful as a record of retouches 
and stoppings which are to be removed by the restorer, but it is never safe to 
assume that all stoppings are recorded by the rays or that all patches on the 
photograph are stoppings. The lamp seldom yields more information about 
a picture than can be detected by the experienced investigator during the cri- 
tical examination in the ordinary way, but it gives results comparatively quickly. 

Infra-red rays. 

16. — The method of infra-red examination is purely a photographic process 
and, given a suitable source of illumination, depends on the use of a filter in the 
camera which will pass infra-red whilst excluding the other forms of radiation. 
Special photographic plates are required, coated with an emulsion sensitive to 
the longer wave-lengths. The light source may conveniently be a battery of 
tungsten-filament lamps. 

Hoto used. — The ordinary photographic technique applies if the lens is of 
the type corrected for infra-red work. 

After focussing by visible light, a dark red (LR.) filter is inserted in the lens 
system and the exposure made. An infra-red safe-light-screen is required for 

the dark-room lantern, ^ ^ • r 

Special problems for which suited. As the investigation of pictures by infra- 
red photography has been developed comparatively recently, it is not yet pos- 


45 





9* NORMAL PHOTOGRAPHIC PRINT OF A FRAGMENT OF AN OLD DUTCH PAINTING. 
THE REPAINTS ARE BARELY VISIBLE, 




*s ■ 


MV 


liiili. 


10 . SAME FRAGMENT PHOTOGRAPHED BY X-RAYS. THE GAPS IN THE OLD PRIMING ARE PARTI- 
CULARLY CONSPICUOUS, BUT THE RETOUCHINGS APPEAR ONLY AS VAGUE SHADOWY PATCHES. 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


sible to define the scope of the work. The most striking successes have doubt- 
less been in revealing' details in dark paint, notably in pictures which are dirty 
or badly bloomed. The method has occasionally given good results in the 
study of inscriptions. Most striking effects have been obtained where the 
ground is of old leather which, on ageing, may become so dense in tone as almost, 
if not entirely, to conceal any remains of painted decoration. Such a ground 
may appear quite light in an infra-red photograph. 

Precautions. ■ — ^ The usual precautions are' necessary in order to avoid over- 
heating the picture and in drawing conclusions from the results of the exami- 
nation (Fig. 26). ■ 

Colorimetry* 

17« — The application of the photo-electric cell has been suggested in order 
to obtain a numerical record of the intensity of lights and shadows, readings 
being taken on a galvanometer. What seems a method of more practical utility 
is to use some form of colour change-measuring device such as the tintometer, 
and, by this means, colour changes which may take place, due perhaps to fading 
or to the depositions of dirt, may be recorded (I). 

As a research instrument, the colorimeter is of value in the study of pigments 
and colour mixtures; it also has a potential use in some kinds of restoration 
work where positive evidence of the previous condition of the painting is impor-' 
tant. ■ 

X-Ray Crystal Structure Aualysis* . 

18. — Among the Instruments used for this kind of examination we would 
mention the X-ray camera designed in the Research Laboratory of the Cour- 
tauld Institute of Art, London, which is a modification of the standard type of 
apparatus used for identifying certain pigments by photographing the charac- 
teristic pattern of the rays resulting from diffraction by crystals in the paint 
film of the picture. This highly specialised type of Investigation has the ad- 
vantage over other analytical methods that it can be applied direct to the picture 
in cases where it is considered impossible or inadvisable to remove the requisite 
sample for chemical analysis. 

(1) For a detailed description of this method, see: F. Ian G. Rawlins, Studies in the Colorimetry 
of Paintings, I and //, Technical Studies, Vol. 4, 1935-36, pp. 179-186; Technical Studies, Vol. 5, 
1936-37, pp. 150-156. 


48 





,v 


\4xf^ 


f®SS' 


v;;i-,'; r‘\\f'A’^4 


B . ■ 
" , 


11 . DETAII. OF THE FRAGMENT REPRODUCED IN THE TWO PREVIOUS PRINTS, PHOTOGRAPHED 
BY ULTRA-VIOLET RAYS (PROCESS DEVISED BY PROFESSOR MAURER, OF VIENNA). THIS PROCESS, 
WHICH BRINGS OUT RETOUCHINGS VERY CLEARLY, IS BASED ON THE POSSIBILITY OF REVEALING 
BY PHOTOGRAPHY THE CONTRASTS, INVISIBLE TO THE NAKED EYE, DUE, ON THE ONE HAND, 
TO DIFFERENCES IN THE COMPOSITION OF THE COLOURS AND MEDIA USED IN THE ORIGINAL 
AND IN THE REPAINTS, AND, ON THE OTHER, TO THE CHANGE IN THE ACTINIC POWER OF ONE 
AND THE SAME COMPOSITION, ACCORDING TO THE AGE OF THE PICTURE. 


T'H E. CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


.Micrciscopy. 

19* — The present chapter would not be complete without some reference 
to methods involving the use of the microscope. 

With the compound microscope and suitable objectives and illumination, 
one can supplement the data already obtained in binocular examination. 

Provided the field is sufficiently flat and free from glare, it is possible to get 
good results of details of such subjects as the varnish or paint particles, or of 
the, ground where it is exposed, up to diameters of X 100 and more. But as 
the possibilities are entirely determined by the type of instruments ' available 
and are generally more restricted than when a small individual sample of material 
is under examination, more detailed consideration may be deferred to the next 
section. (See also §§ 159-162). 

, . IL — Special methods applied to samples taken from pictures 
Extraction of samples. . 

20. — The object of sampling a picture is to study the nature and succession 
of each or all of the various layers. A hypodermic needle is used, sawn off and 
sharpened like a miniature cork-borer, and with this instrument it is possible 
to obtain a microscopic cylinder representing all strata of the picture. This is 
transferred to a glass slide for microscopic examination. The tiny hole left in 
the picture may easily be rendered invisible. It should never penetrate the 
canvas and some little skill is required in order to avoid this. 

Sometimes, suitable test-pieces may be taken from the edge of a canvas or 
panel without the aid of the needle. Special care is then necessary to ensure 
that samples are truly representative and not simply fragments from later addi- 
tions to the picture. 

Microscopic Exammation. 

21. — With suitable apparatus. It is possible to measure the thickness of the 
various layers as well as to study their succession. The layers may sometimes 
be dissected and examined independently, the binding medium, oil, varnish, etc. 
being dissolved and removed by the use of a suitable solvent such as toluene. 
Pigments may be recognised by their colour, fineness of division, type of frac- 


50 



T H E C, 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N' 0 F P A I N T I N G S 

ture, etc., or by the characteristic appearance which several present when exam- 
ined in polarised light. 

By the methods of ordinary microscopy using transmitted light, specimens 
can be examined up to resolutions of about XiOOO diameters, but one is rarely 
obliged to have recourse to the higher magnifications. Indeed, magnifications 
of the order of X 1 00 and, exceptionally, X 250, are generally the most useful. 

. By the introduction of Nicol prisms, which . polarise the light, certain sub- 
stances may be recognised under the microscope by their depolarising pro- 
perties. 

Examinations conducted by reflected light are of even greater general utility 
because, under these conditions, the natural colour of the specimen is preserved. 
The great handicap is always the amount of reflected white light, which is a 
consequence of the bright illumination required, and this can only be overcome 
satisfactorily by the use of a specialised microscopic equipment designed to 
give critical illumination by light which is polarised. One of the best types 
of microscope for work either direct on paintings or on particles removed from 
them, IS the Leitz Ultrapak”, provided with a polarising attachment for the 
light, and a ‘‘Monla” lamp. This effectively eliminates glare and makes it 
possible for work to be done with dry objectives up to magnifications of X500 
diameters with normal oculars. It provides brilliant definition for photo- 
micrography. For other purposes, one may replace the ‘‘Monla” lamp by 
an arc lamp having tungsten-cored carbons; such an arrangement requires, as 
a necessary addition, an intermediate cooling system in order to protect the 
objective lenses of the microscope and the specimen under examination. The 
insertion of a Wood’s screen between the arc lamp and the objective system 
cuts off the visible rays and the micro-specimen can then be studied by ultra- 
violet radiation. This is the process of fluorescence microscopy, a highly spe- 
cialised development which is destined to prove of value in the study of painting 
materials. 

Of the many problems which may he solved by microscopic investigation, 
it must suffice to mention only one, which nevertheless is extremely important 
and one of the commonest: the study of craquelure in the region of an inscription. 
If the continuity of the lines of the inscription is broken by the craquelure, the 
Inscription may be shown to be as old as the rest of the paint; whereas if the 
painted lines of the inscription are seen to be inside the depressions of the cra- 
quelure, the inscription must of necessity be of a later date then the craquelure. 

The facts may sometimes be rendered apparent by the use of a hand lens; 

51 


T HE GO NSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 

sometimes the higher powers of the microscope are required, or even the use 
of the microscope with ultra-violet radiation described as fluorescence micros- 
copy. If a falsification of the kind exists, it should be detectable by one or 
other of the special methods of enquiry already described. 

X-Ray Crystal Structure Analysis. 

22. — This method, which is of limited application but of the greatest value 
for the identification of crystalline substances, depends on the conception of 
the crystal as a definite pattern of molecules in space; the crystal gives rise to a 
characteristic diffraction pattern on a sensitised photographic film when it is 
bombarded with X-rays in a special form of camera. The pattern produced 
on the film provides a powerful method of analysis and identification, even 
when only a minute grain of crystalline material is available for study. 

When it is possible to apply the method to a separate sample in this way, results 
are obtained which lend themselves more readily to interpretation by direct 
comparison with standards than in the modification of the process already referred 
to, which operates directly on the picture. Furthermore, the sample is not lost 
in the process of testing as is the case in chemical and spectrographlc analysis. 

Microchemical Examination. 

23. — Historical and chemical studies of the pigments used by artists through- 
out the ages have occupied the attention of various workers, and, as a result, 
it has been established when certain pigments first made their appear- 
ance on the artist’s palette and which were favoured by certain schools. (See 
Chapter XIII). Information on such matters is not only of importance to the 
history of art, but when pigments can be recognised by chemical or other means, 
this may provide conclusive evidence in detecting falsifications or in recognising 
repainted passages; and to know which pigments are present in a painting may 
even help with the more specialised problem of determining authorship. 

As a general rule, in chemical analysis, a substance must be isolated before 
it can with certainty be identified. If only a tiny fragment is available for ana- 
lysis, the isolation of the required material from the foreign constituents which 
are invariably present will still further reduce the sample, which must then be 
dealt with by the so-called microchemical methods.) 

Mlcrochemical processes involve a particular manipulation technique and 


52 


12 . DETAIL OF A XVITH CENTURY FLEMISH 
PAINTING, PHOTOGRAPHED BY NATURAL LIGHT. 


13 . SAME DETAIL PHOTOGRAPHED WITH A 
MERCURY-VAPOUR LAMP, WITHOUT FILTER. 




THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


the use of a eompound microscope. Results are ' obtained and conclusions 
drawn by obser¥ing some change in the .material that occurs when it is brought 
into contact with a specific reagent. The change is commonly a colour change and 
often depends on the formation of characteristic crystals which can be recognised. 

Pigments are grouped according to colour, and any pigment of a group can 
be identified by systematic testing, which eliminates all others from that par- 
ticular group, except the one under examination; the routine having at length 
suggested to the operator the probable nature of the pigment under examination, 
it remains to apply a specific test which will confirm his conclusion (1). 


SpectrograpMc Examination. 



24. - Only a few milligrams of material are required for the spectrographic 
examination of a sample containing metallic constituents, and the result is a 
pattern of lines on a photographic plate, which indicates the presence not only 
of the principal constituents of the sample but also of metallic impurities which 
may be present only in traces. 

Qualitative results may be obtained by this process with speed and certainty 
in the form of a permanent record. 

In one sense, however, such a complete record may be confusing in giving 
a mass of insignificant data and, indeed, it is always desirable to confirm the 
spectrographic evidence by microchemical analysis when enough material is 
available for the purpose. On the other hand, as knowledge of the subject 
is increased, it is possible that in certain cases, as for example in the examination 
of the green earths which are derived from different mineral sources, these very 
impurities may become of significance in giving a clue to the source of the 
material examined. 

The methods of absorption spectrography are likely in the future to be brought 
to the study of binding media and of organic pigments and natural dyestuffs, 
and may afford a possible method of identifying materials which are difficult to 
deal with by simpler means. 


(I) For the fundamental principles of this microchemicai method as applied to pigments used 
in painting materials, see F.E.C. Scheffer: Uexamen chimiqm ies tableaux {Mouseiotiy VoL 13-14, 
pp. 93-103); A. Eibner: U analyse mkrochimique des couleurs (Mouseion, VoL 29-30, pp. 1 13-126); 
A. P. Laurie: Un laloratoire pour Vexamen des peinfures (Mouseion, VoL 17-18, pp. 119-122); R. 
J. Gettens and G. L, Stout: The Stage Microscope in the Routine Examination of Paintings, Tech- 
nical Studies, IV, 1935-36, pp. 207-233. 

54 


T HE CONSERVATION 


PAIN T I N' G S 


Refractive Index Determinations. 

25 . — - The refractive index of egg tempera film has been shown to remain 
practically constant for hundreds of years, whereas that of the linseed-oil film 
suffers a gradual increase of remarkable regularity (1). 

The method which depends on the extraction of the binding medium from 
a micro-sample of the paint film and upon its subsequent examination with a. 
refractometer has proved useful in the detection of repainting and of unusual 
painting media, and for distinguishing egg tempera from oil; it is also claimed 
that where linseed-oil has been used alone the refractive index of the film may 
actually provide some indication of the age of the picture. 


The above summary of specialised methods of investigation is in no sense 
exhaustive; it is merely intended to point to some of the principal lines of inves- 
tigation which may yield results of interest to the art historian, and to guide 
curators in forming their judgment of these methods and of the data which they 
may be expected to provide. 

Thus conceived, the scientific examination of paintings is in all cases to be 
subservient to the requirements of the curator whose interest lies in conservation 
and in the study of the artistic and technical features of the works In his care. 

The limits of the general examination must be clearly defined by the end in 
view, namely the compilation of a case sheet for each picture which will provide 
all information of significance for its health and study. 

When a sample of material is available for independent examination, the 
limits of the study are as Inexhaustible as the methods of science, and It is the 
more important and necessary to envisage the problem and to exploit these 
methods in such a way as will yield results which are, in the first instance, of 
some artistic significance and value. 

(I) Laurie: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London^ Series A, N° 896, Vol. 159, pp. 1 23- 1 33. 



CHAPTER III 


THE 


General considerations (cf. 

26® — Experiments and observations in various countries have shown that | 

although sudden violent changes of temperature may affect the structure of the I 

component parts of a picture, changes in the water-vapour content of the air ; 

— which are moreover intimately bound up with fluctuations of temperature — 
are the decisive factor in the phenomena of deterioration due to the surrounding 
atmosphere. Such deterioration, which will be examined later in connection ; 

with the constituent parts of pictures, can be mechanical, chemical or biolo- 
gical: expansion and contraction of the hygroscopic matter which absorbs or I 

exudes the humidity of the surrounding air, in accordance with the laws of I 

equilibrium; chemical or biological disintegration of such matter, especially | 

in the presence of water. | 

27. — All hygroscopic matter has a degree of elasticity enabling it, within 
limits, to follow the movements of expansion and contraction caused by varia- 
tions in the hygrometrlc ratio (water-vapour content of the air measured against 
temperature). But it has been proved that these fluctuations, when repeated, 
appreciably decrease the coefficient of elasticity of the matter in question, even 
when they constitute only a small fraction of the strain the object can normally : 

stand. Now paintings are always composite bodies and their different parts i 

do not react to external agents in the same proportions: the phenomenon of 
expansion and contraction is thus complicated by the fact that the component 
parts do not expand and contract simultaneously in accordance with the same ! 

coefficient, which may lead to dissociation, distortion or breakage of the com- ; 

ponents which originally formed a whole. If the physical process of deterior- 
ation is accompanied, as is often the case, by chemical or biological action 
(rotting, oxidisation, dissolution, mildew, etc.), the phenomenon is even more 
complex. As the relative humidity is to some extent a gauge of the drying or 


SURROUNDINGS 


185 and 187). 


57 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 





S 





(I 


moistening powers of the air, it follows that a change in the hygrometric reading 
IS a more active factor of . deterioration than' the customary changes of tennperature 
(day to night, season to season, etc.). For not only does the hygrometric reading' 
vary within wider limits, but even tiny variations in the water-content alter the 
size and shape of most hygroscopic matter to a greater extent than the relatively 
more impressive changes of temperature. 

■ This law is confirmed by the fact that objects can be effectively . protected 
against deterioration by a coat of wax or varnish that would be of little use 
against temperature changes. It follows that adequate protection depends on 
decreasing the process of water exchange between the object and the atmosphere. 

The rules for the local protection of objects against hygrometric variations 
will be explained in other chapters; the problem we must attack here Is the 
general protection of paintings, in so far as it may be secured by treatment of 
the atmosphere of the premises in which they are kept. 

We may conclude from these preliminary considerations that changes in the 
hygrometric reading must be reduced to a mimmum; the optimum reading 
round which the oscillations of the relative humidity can centre can then be 
established. 



28* — We have no adequate information at present to enable us to fix an abso- 
lute standard. The reason for choosing 60 to 65% as the figure for relative 
humidity for practical purposes is that in many climates it is the nearest approach 
to the conditions in which a degree of stability maybe easily o^^^^ It must 

be observed, however, that this figure,' which is quite suitable especially for oil 
painting with a wood or canvas support, does not necessarily represent the right 
surroundings for all the constituent parts of all kinds of paintings. For water- 
colours, In particular, where the process of deterioration depends on both humi- 
dity and light, a still drier atmosphere would be more suitable; but the support 
— paper, vellum, canvas, etc.— would suffer. Another point should be taken 
into account, as it also decreases the absolute validity of the standard given 
above : objects reaching the museum have often had a long habit of environments 
very different — damper or drier— from those of a normally conditioned exhi- 
bition room; If the necessary precautions are not taken to get the object gradually 
used to the new surroundings (which is sometimes impossible), damage Is unav- 
oidable. 

Bearing In mind these reservations, we shall examine what methods are avail- 
able of maintaining the composition of the air within reasonable limits and what 

58 



factors can be utilised 'to obtain , a balance between the water content of the 
objects and of the surrounding air. 

In a temperate climate, 60% of relative humidity Is the easiest standard to 
keep up. At normal temperatures, this represents comfortable conditions for 
the human organism. As to the temperature, visitors , in most' countries- of 
northern Europe are satisfied with 1 6® C. and will even accept a lower tempera'- 
ture since coats are usually kept on in art galleries. In A.merica, the usual 
temperature is 21°. The human organism is not very sensitive to deviations 
of 30% or even more from the normal temperature. On the other hand, if the 
atmosphere is near saturation point, the presence of water- vapour becomes 
more noticeable on account of the comparatively reduced evaporation of the 
organism; but below 70% of relative humidity, very drastic changes have no 
effect on the visitor’s comfort. It may thus be assumed that atmospheric 
conditions at present considered normal for the majority of objects in museums 
will also be acceptable to visitors. 

Let us now look at the five principal factors in air-conditioning: 

1. Extent of air renewal; 

2. Pressure of the atmosphere; 

3. Temperature; 

4. Water- vapour content; 

5. Amount of dust, oxides of sulphur and other impurities. 


29* — No adjustment can be perfect, especially since the conditions required 
must be, for various reasons, quite different from those of the outside atmos- 
phere. In the case of a new building to be erected, the first step will be to 
collect all available information on atmospheric conditions throughout the year. 
In normal brick or stone buildings, variations of temperature and humidity will 
not be felt so keenly as outside; the lag will be due to the insulating powers of 
the material, the arrangement of the windows, the type of roof, the direction 
in which the building faces and the number of times an hour the air is changed. 
All these factors must be taken into account when studying the ventilation 
scheme of either an existing building or the plans for a new construction. Gen- 
erally speaking, the amount of fresh air taken from outside should be reduced 
to a minimum in normal times; care should be taken, however, to counter the 
effects of a sudden rush of visitors by providing adjustments to compensate for 


59 



the extra humidity thus brought in and the^ more frequent changes of air re- 
quired. In buildings where rushes are expected, and where large supplies of 
fresh air are consequently required, the most reliable method would be to. place 
objects that are particularly sensitive to water- vapour in sealed glass cases insu- 
lated from the air of the room and fed with conditioned air., 

. A frequent error in both the conception of ventilating plants and the admi- 
nistrative regulations of museums is the supplying of far too much fresh air at 
too frequent intervals. Some plants change the air up to three or four times 
an hour when one partial change would be quite enough. A similar mistake 
consists in setting ventilators to work to bring in air from outside without check- 
ing the effects of the air change. It can easily be imagined what happens when 
the ventilators are turned on, for Instance, when the weather is hot and damp, 
on days when it is a great temptation to set them going full swing — the almost 
saturated hot air is introduced into the building during the hottest hours of the 
day and may cool down in the evening and during the night, so that the inside 
atmosphere reaches saturation point. The one legitimate use of ventilators is 
to make the air circulate, not to draw in air from the outside. In a museum 
room from 4 m. 50 to 6 metres in height it is unnecessary, for the great majority 
of the exhibits, to change the air at a higher rate than a half or three quarters of 
the volume of the room per hour. Should there be an exceptional afflux of 
visitors, it is the curator’s job to decide how far the requirements of conservation 


Atmospheric Pressure. 

30. — The atmospheric pressure inside a building cannot be effectively regu- 
lated except by mechanical ventilation. If a proper plant is available, care 
should be taken to keep the inside pressure always slightly higher than the out- 
side, to prevent non-conditioned air from entering in accordance with the laws 
of equilibrium. This principle is Incorporated in the ‘Plenum’ system which 
is based on the distribution of air already under pressure. 


Temperature.' 

31. — As we have pointed out above, the temperature generally adopted is 
that demanded by the comfort of the visitor, about 1 6^ C. in north European 



T H E . C 0 N S E R: V A T. I O N OF PAINTINGS 


museums and 21^ in America. This temperature is suitable for the conser- 
vation of objects, provided that the other atmospheric conditions required can 
also be secured. But whenever these conditions can be adjustable, a lower 
temperature should be adopted, for several organisms (parasites, etc.) become 
harmful at about 20^. There are few museums where the temperature of the 
exhibition rooms is constantly regulated throughout the year: the structure 
and lay-out of the existing buildings would make it impossible, or at least very 
expensive, to cool down the premises during the heat of summer, especially 
when the atmosphere is particularly .wet; in such cases, the air would first have 
to be cooled down on entry and afterwards heated up again to reduce its per- 
centage of humidity. The solution most often adopted will be to set apart 
one or two rooms where a suitable atmosphere meeting the requirements of 
specially delicate works can be obtained. 

This is not the place for a detailed description of heating systems and a com- 
parison of their merits. It will suffice to point out one or two details concerning 
central heating, which is more and more frequently used. (We would note en 
passant that the system of open fires — stoves, etc. is fairly satisfactory from 
the standpoint of air-conditioning; but it has serious drawbacks ash and coal 
dust, fire risk, heat too localised). 

Generally speaking, with heating by radiators, it is often not realised how 
difficult it Is to keep a uniform temperature in all parts of a room, especially 
when the premises include outside walls, the temperature of which on winter 
days Is sometimes 3 to 6® lower than that of the premises inside. Consequently, 
should a painting or a glass case be placed against such a wall, it will be exposed 
to serious risks of deterioration, as the relative humidity will be quite different 
at the back and at the front. These conditions cannot be checked by a casual 
examination; things would have to be pushed to the extreme for the naked eye 
to be able to ascertain traces of condensed water vapour; but the deterioration 
of course occurs well before the phenomenon in question can be discovered. 
There are special thermometers for checking the temperature of the architectural 
elements of premises — walls, floor, ceiling. They could be used to find out 
the critical points, and the latter could be borne In mind when placing the 
objects. A remedy should not on any account be sought In altering the position 
of the radiators so as to direct their heat on to the critical spots, as this would 
merely increase the discrepancy we have already mentioned between the back 
and front of the object. 

These reservations must not be taken as a condemnation of radiator heating; 


I 



61 


TEE. G 0 N S E RV A T 1 0 N 0 F PAINTINGS 


they merely show that great circumspection is needed in the choice and placing 
of radiators* . • . ■ ' ■ 

The system of radiating panels on the walls or ceilings, heated by water or 
electricity, provides an agreeable atmosphere and has the advantage of leaving 
the floor space quite free. The panels should always be as big as possible so 
as to give a suitable temperature with elements that do not get hotter than 45® C* 

■ The ideal arrangement would be to provide for a cavity in all the outside walls 
and roofs; this cavity would be scientifically insulated and fed with hot air, so 
that the inside surface could be kept at a constant temperature of 17® at the 
maximum. It would be sufficient to add extra heating to bring the incoming 
air to the same temperature and to feed small heating panels near the windows, 
so as to make up for the loss due to glass surfaces. This system would be too 
expensive for an original lay-out, but would be economical in use and should 
not be rejected without consideration in the planning of lay-out schemes. 

In the usual type of gallery with overhead lighting and walls reserved for 
hanging pictures, heating is provided through grills in the middle of the floor 
equipped with a ventilating conduit. This system is generally satisfactory, 
if it includes the usual devices for insulating the walls, so that the temperature 
of their inner surface is not too low. Moreover, the glass part of the roof 
should be surrounded by a heating pipe to prevent the cold from descending 
into the room. 

Water-vapour content, 

32. — The question of hygrometric ratio has already been studied from the 
standpoint of its physical, chemical or biological effects on hygroscopic matter. 
We should like to add here that the essential point is to keep the hygrometric 
reading within as narrow limits as possible. In this connection, the effective 
action of the apparatus available should be examined as a compensator of natural 
atmospheric variations or a controller of the quality of the air admitted into the 
exhibition premises. 

There seem to be certain misunderstandings about the action of air-condi- 
tioning apparatus. The term is often taken to mean a simple device for washing 
air, including only a vaporiser or damp contact points. The air treated by 
this washing device has a degree of dampness proportional to the length of 
contact and limited by the degree of saturation which varies with the temperature 
of the water. If the same washing water is sent back into circulation, the air 


62 


THE C Q N S E R V A TIP N OF PAINTINGS 


will cool down to the temperature it registered on entry and the change it un-^ 
dergoes will be away from, and not towards, the ideal degree. Unless it is fitted 
with an automatic regulator working in conjunction with a hygrostat, such a 
conditioning apparatus cannot be more than a damp filter and should . coBse- 
quently only be set in motion on days when the degree of absolute humidity 
outside is lower, than that required by the normal conditions of the premises. 
It goes without saying that when the water- vapour content has reached or exceeded' 
the required level, only dry filtering should be used, except when the air- 
conditioning apparatus enables the hygrometric ratio to be lowered. 

Amoinit of dust, oxides of sulphur and other impurities. 

33. — Dry filtering will not eliminate gaseous impurities, such as the oxides 
of sulphur, which are the commonest form of impurity and also the most harm- 
ful. Complete elimination can be obtained by the use of an alkaline washing 
liquid, but no apparatus for absorbing or rubbing fulfilling the special requi- 
rements of a museum has as yet been perfected. Such a system, which encoun- 
ters no practical difficulty in the way of handling or supervision in a laboratory 
or a chemical works, could not be used in a museum where control by a specialist 
can take place only infrequently and where it is imperative to adopt an equipment 
that can be worked by the mere turning of a switch or the opening of a valve. 

The purification of all the air entering a museum would be a very difficult 
problem, considering the enormous amount of air to be treated. Once again, 
we are forced to the conclusion that for particularly delicate objects, local con- 
ditioning — in a glass case containing several objects, a small room or a picture 
frame, etc. — will in most cases be the only practical proposition. 

Very satisfactory results would, of course, be obtained if factories and works 
could be prevailed upon to consume their own sulphur emanations by fitting 
absorption apparatus in their chimneys. 


63 



CHAPTER IV 


THE ACTION OF LIGHT ON PAINTINGS 


34. — Light, especially in the presence of moisture, is a potent factor in the 
fading of pigments, the nature of the action being modified considerably by the 
type of medium in which the pigment is ground. 

Experiments have shown that the most active rays are those near the violet 
end of the visible spectrum. While ultra-violet light is not so chemically active 
as those rays which are visibly transmitted through blue glass, its effect cannot 
be ignored. Blue, violet and ultra-violet rays are by far the most active in 
causing the fading of pigments, the amount of fading depending on the Intensity 
and time of exposure. 

Sunlight contains far less blue light than does sky light, and when reduced 
to equal intensity sunlight is only approximately half as active in causing the 
fading of fugitive pigments. The heating effect Is decidedly deleterious, how- 
ever, and on this account no picture should be exposed to direct sunlight. Ex- 
posure to a blue sky for long periods is likewise to be avoided, by reason of the 
activity of the blue and violet rays. Under the same conditions of Intensity, 
the fading caused by Incandescent light Is quite negligible. It should be men- 
tioned that light reflected from a glass mirror contains, at equal intensity, a 
smaller proportion of ultra-violet rays than that contained In direct light and 
that it is therefore more suitable for delicate paintings. The pigments which, 
when fugitive, are most affected, are those most capable of absorbing blue and 
violet rays, namely, the reds, yellows and greens. 

35. — The binding media vary in their reaction to light, some being entirely 
unaffected (water-colour medium) and others (tempera, poppy-oil) change only 
to a slight extent. If a painting in which linseed oil has been used is insuffi- 
ciently illuminated, however, the oil darkens, becoming yellow and eventually 
brown, and the whole picture is lowered in tone in consequence. Oil paintings 
should be hung and stored in such a manner that they are exposed to a good 
white light — ^a north light where possible. Those which must occupy less 



65 


5 


T HE CONSERVATION ■ 0 F PAINTING S 



favoured positions should be taken to good lighting periodically if they are to be 
maintained in good condition. A scheme of storage in which pictures are hung 
on vertical screens mounted on castors has much to recommend it as the position 
of the screen can be readily changed and the lighting controlled. For reasons 
that will be readily understood, however, this scheme is not one that can be 
generalised in museum buildings; furthermore, there is a risk that paintings 
will be shaken if all the necessary precautions are not taken to ensure a proper 
equilibrium of the screen and to eliminate vibration from the castors. The 
lighting may also' be controlled by louvered shutters fitted into the windows. 
The darkening of linseed oil can be mitigated by exposure to bright light until 
the oil Is bleached to its original colour. 


36® — Prints (1), such as mezzotints, which contain much oil require to be 
exposed to a good light at intervals of a few months. They are usually stored 
in darkness and, if not attended to, become dull and often mildewed, the oil 
acting as nutrient material for moulds. 


37* — Water-colours soon become lowered in tone by over-exposure to light, 
as the medium affords little or no protection to the pigments; more rigid pre- 
cautions in this respect are therefore necessary than is the case for oil and tem- 
pera paintings. Such drawings should be stored in darkness, suitably mounted 
to prevent rubbing, and ought not to be hung permanently in the exhibition 
gallery. In summer, it may be an advantage to introduce velaria under the 
roof lights of the water-colour gallery or to coat the outside of the glass with a 
mixture of whiting and size. Delicate specimens should be placed in dull light 
or should be protected by some form of screen, such as a movable curtain of 
woven material. The best materials for curtains are matted fabrics of the velvet 
type which are quite opaque, but any textile may be employed if it is lined with 
some kind of light-tight fabric. A simple test is to expose the proposed fabric 
over sensitised paper in a photographic printing frame and to observe the result 
on developing the paper; the silver image should be practically non-existent. 
The colour of the curtain is immaterial and may be chosen to harmonise with 
the general decoration scheme. 


(1) A special study dealing with this type of works of art was published in Momeion: La Conser- 
vaiion des EsiampeSy Dessins ef Mamscriis, by H. J. Plenderleith; VoL 29-30, pp. 81-104, and VoL 


T H E CON S E R V A T I 0 N OF PA I N T ,1 N G S 


38® - The glazing of picture frames diminishes the action of ultra-violet light 

to some extent; the main arguments in favour of the use of glass are connected, 
with other aspects of the subject (general mechanical protection, hygiene). No 
special glasses designed to filter the chemically active rays are yet available which 
are themselves colourless or sufficiently clear to be used for framing or for roof- 
lighting, and the introduction of such tinted glasses would upset- the colour 
values of paintings. 

39. — Special care is required during the taking of photographs, both on the 
score of lighting and heating. For ordinary photography, the heating effect 
of a battery of lamps may be lessened by interposing a large sheet of plate glass 
between the lamps and the picture. This applies more particularly in the case 
of the long exposures sometimes required for the photographing of oil paintings. 
Photography by ultra-violet rays should be restricted to subjects which do not 
require long exposures, as the heating effect of the quartz lamp is generally 
considerable. A suitable light filter such as a Wood’s screen should be em- 
ployed in practice, and invariably where fugitive pigments are suspected to be 
present. (This question is dealt with in greater detail in Chapter II). 




CHAPTER V 


EFFECTS OF CAIDLE SMOKE AND CERTAIN METHODS 

OF HEATING. 


40« — It sometimes happens that valuable paintings which are or have been 
kept in churches or other places of worship become seriously damaged by 
candle smoke or even by the actual flame of the votive lamps. 

This is not without its alarming side, as the damage caused by smoke or 
flame may be very great; and the habit of placing candles or lamps near the 
sacred images, which is very common in several regions, shows no signs of 
disappearing. The people and sometimes ministers of religion themselves 
are so strongly attached to their habits and traditions that they cannot easily 
be persuaded to refrain from a practice that has already done irreparable harm. 

The grease given off by candle smoke and incense has a tendency to combine 
with dust to form a crust on the painted surface, which quickly turns quite 
black. This crust is sometimes so old and adheres so strongly to the painting 
that it is a very delicate matter to remove it. Moreover, on account of their 
very nature and composition, the grease deposits tend to pierce the film of paint 
and combine with the substance of the picture. Naturally, the phenomenon is 
more likely to occur when the pictures are not protected by a varnish which is 
proof against such emanations. Paintings with a very smooth surface protected 
by very resistant varnish may, however, be cleaned with considerable chance 
of success. It is advisable, in the first stage of operations, to soften the deposits 
with highly purified fatty substances; they may then be removed, keeping the 
paint as dry as possible. 

In this connection, we may quote the example of a thirteenth century panel, 
representing the Crucifixion, exposed for centuries in the church of San Dome- 
nico at Naples, to the gaze of worshippers and thus to the fumes of candles and 
incense. The restoration of this work to its original conditions was made 
possible mainly by the fact that it had been protected from the outset by a 
robust and extremely transparent varnish, which was retained on the restored 
picture. . . . . 


69 


41. — Blit the most serious damage is caused by the flames of lamps or candles 
—swelling or burning of the painted surface. Burnt areas must be regarded as 
irremediably lost; swellings may often be cured by attaching the affected film 
to the support by means of an adhesive or by running in melted wax. It is 
obviously better to take drastic steps to protect valuable works against accidents 
of this kind while there is still time. A good example is that of the Antiquities 
and Fine Arts Administration in Italy, which drew the attention of , the ecclesi- 
astical authorities and the priests entrusted with the upkeep of churches to the 
risks incurred by their pictures and the necessity of personally supervising 
precious works of art exhibited to worshippers on holidays and during proces- 
sions. The result was that, in almost every case, oil-lamps and candles were 
replaced by electric light and the most valuable paintings were placed under 
glass. 

Many episcopal authorities have issued orders of this kind, while, on their 
own account, the Central Committee for Sacred Art and various diocesan com- 
mittees in Italy drew the attention of those who are responsible for churches to 
the serious damage that may be caused, especially to paintings and sculptures 
on wood, by the practices mentioned above. 

42. — Attention must also be paid to the effects of smok^ from fireplaces, above 
which paintings are frequently hung in private houses and in some reconstruc- 
tions of interiors. It can easily be observed that, after some time, soot is depo- 
sited, especially on the upper part of the picture, as the smoke (some of which 
always escapes into the room, however well the chimney draws) follows the 
mantelpiece and then curls round on to the wall. Valuable pictures should 
therefore not be hung above fireplaces, just as they should not be hung above 
pipe radiators; apart from the risks of overheating and desiccation, these radia- 
tors form a dust-attracting aera, the dust adhering to the wall above the source 
of heat. 


CHAPTER VI 



lEACTIONS OF THE CONSTITUENT PARTS OF PAINTINGS 
TO HUMIDITY AND TEMPERATURE CHANGES 


We have already given a general account of how hygroscopic matter reacts 
to changes in the hygrometric ratio of the surrounding air. We shall now give 
further details of the effect of such changes on the constituent parts of a picture 
— support, priming, paint-layer and varnish. 

It may be observed that a picture, as a whole, is always sensitive to hygro- 
metric variations. 

The Supports. 

43* — Generally speaking, humidity may be the cause of biological growths 
in the size of the priming-layer, which penetrate to the back in the case of a 
canvas and collect round the sides when the support is of wood. 

The repeated expansion and contraction of the wood or canvas eventually 
causes deterioration of the priming layer and the paint film, which in time lose 
their elasticity and adhesive powers. Besides these movements of shrinking and 
swelling, the wood undergoes a continuous contraction transversally to its 
grain. This contraction warps the panel, as the front, which is protected by 
the priming and the paint, gives up its humidity more slowly than the back and, 
in consequence, is less Inclined to shrink. Hence the convexity of most old 
paintings on wood. 

Canvas too suffers continuous distortion apart from the tensile and compres- 
sive movements due to the alternation of dampness and dryness. It is to avoid 
over-sensitivity to hygrometric fluctuations that canvases are often ‘shrunk’, 
i.e. repeatedly wetted and stretched. This operation is of particular importance 
when the canvas is Intended for relining. 

It has been observed that, in spite of their apparent fragility, the paper or 
parchment supports often used in olden times, fastened to a more rigid support, 
often prove to be the most resistant of all vegetable supports. (See also § 183). 






I 

I 




I 


71 



Priming. 

44® — A detailed account of the effect of humidity on the priming will be 
found in the chapter devoted to that subject. We must mention here, however, 
the special effects of repeated variations in the hygrometric ratio on the com- 
ponent parts of the priming. (All sizes, apart from casein, absorb water. For 
a time, they follow the movements of the support. When they , have lost, their 
elasticity, they give way and develop crackles.) 

When the humidity increases, light pn'mm^s (plaster, calcium or ochre, bound 
in a glue of animal or vegetable origin) absorb the water vapour and become 
slightly thinner; a return to dry atmospheric conditions evaporates the water 
absorbed, which takes with it part of the thinned-out size. Thus the priming 
layer gradually loses its adhesive powers and, in extreme cases, may actually 
come away from the support. If the picture already shows cracks, it will flake; 
otherwise, it will blister. Repeated alternation of dryness and dampness may 
even cause complete evaporation of the size. The absolute humidity and varia- 
tions in the hygrometric conditions of the atmosphere have thus a decisive effect 
on the priming and, consequently, on the conservation of the painting. For 
the adhesive quality of the priming is an essential factor in the conservation of 
the paint-layer. 

Heavy primings have a base of oil and white lead or other pigment. They 
are none the less open to the influence of humidity as they are always laid on 
with a light glue, applied in a thick consistency. The object of this is to prevent 
the paint from oozing through the interstices of the support and to make the 
paint adhere perfectly to the support. 

There are also mixed primings — heavy primings applied over light ones— 
which must be distinguished from the mixed primings proper in use from the 
XVth to the XVIIth century. These appear to have been emulsions, their 
characteristic feature being their ability to take both fatty and non-fatty sub- 
stances. They also seem to have been far more able to withstand weather changes 
and show very little cracking; the cracks that can be found are probably due to 
the paint rather than to the supporting layer. The conclusion seems to be 
that emulsions are less sensitive than oil or glue alone to hygrometric varia- 
tions. 

To sum up, primings have a glue base, and this is highly sensitive to variations 
in hygrometric conditions: in a dry place, it hardens and causes crackling; in 
alternations of dampness and dryness, it disintegrates and evaporates; in a 

72 


T, H E , C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N O F PAIN T' I ' M G 'S 


wet environment, water penetrates through the cracks and the glue thins out 
and loses its adhesive powers, causing flaking. 

It should not be forgotten that humidity works its way through the support, 
from the back to the priming, to an extent that varies with the kind of support 
and has a similar deleterious effect. 

Paint layer*. 

45« — This is not the place to describe the ways in which the paint layer reacts 
to variations in the surrounding atmosphere. The constituent parts of the 
painting, as will be seen in the detailed chapters in Part II, are the deciding 
factor in the changes that take place in the paint film due to atmospheric varia- 
tions. On the other hand, only the paint layer is affected by light. For this 
reason, a special chapter has been devoted to tbis subject in this general part 
of the Manual. ' 

Varnishes. 

46. ■ — Resin varnishes absorb water. Some resins absorb as much as 20 to 
30% of their own weight. If boiled oil and resin be mixed under unfavourable 
conditions, the resin will be inadequately protected and will absorb water and 
turn white. This is the first stage in the development of mould. 

Details of the disintegration of varnish are given in the chapter on the pro- 
tective layer, which also contains information on wax varnishes, a more effective 
protection against humidity. We must mention here, however, the symptoms 
of deficiencies in the atmospheric conditions to which pictures are exposed. 

In the case of a well-mixed varnish, humidity may be deposited on the' outer 
surface, which turns cloudy; it may then disappear when the atmosphere grows 
drier. Frequent repetition of this process may, however, cause lasting dete- 
rioration. 

The first sign of trouble is a dark, bluish film, especially visible on the blacks 
of the picture; the film thickens and whitens and may eventually cause complete 
disintegration of the resins. 

Once again, the only remedy is to keep hygrometric conditions as constant 
as possible, between 40 and 60%, especially avoiding repeated deviations from 
the degree chosen. (See also §§121-130.) 


73 



CHAPTER VII 


HEATING AND AIR-CONDITIONING 


A study of the points dealt with In the previous chapter may provide certain 
standards for the curator in his choice of precautions to secure the right atmos*- 
phere for the objects in his care. They will also help him to give the right 
information and instructions to the architects and fitters whose job it is to 
construct, alter or equip the premises of his art gallery. 

The expense involved in adequate air-conditioning seems at first sight hardly 
off-set by the saving in restoration costs such a process implies. It will therefore 
be nearly always necessary to make the best of the means available by using 
them as carefully as possible. 

Heating. 

47. — As every specialist who has studied the question acknowledges that 
hygrometric discrepancies have a more harmful effect on paintings than the 
degree of moisture content of the air, curators should devote most of their 
efforts to this point. Too violent sources of radiant heat near the pictures are 
to be avoided, on account of their local drying effect and of draughts, the inten- 
sity of which is in direct ratio to the proximity of the heating supply. 

If heating is effected by means of stoves^ they should be placed outside the 
rooms. If this is done, the exhibits will not be exposed to direct heat waves 
or to coal-dust, smoke or sulphur fumes. 

48. — When heating is obtained by means of hot air^ it is essential to equip 
the heating Inlets with filters to keep back the dust and to regulate, to some 
extent, the humidity of the atmosphere. Care should be taken in the ordinary 
way to study the circulation of the hot air so as to avoid placing objects in the 
path of the main currents, which, besides being harmful in themselves, always 
imply a certain amount of dust suspension. 


■ i 



75 


T H E . C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 

49® — Heating by means of radiators always dries up tHe atmosphere. The 
Lot water' system is in any case better tban steam, for the apparatus is more 
solid and works at a lower temperature than the smaller and hotter steam appa- 
ratus. Moreover,, hot water radiators take much longer, to get cool than steam 
radiators and thus avoid too sudden drops of temperature, should it be neces- 
sary to cut off the heating during the night— an inadvisable process for an art 
gallery. ' 

50« — It is always better to use large heating apparatus at a temperature not 
higher than 45® C. to avoid excessive drying of the air and strong local eddies. 
The use of saturators or other evaporating devices can never fully make up for 
the drying effects of radiators. No central heating system should be fitted 
without the indispensable corollary of a compensating system for moistening the 
air. The necessary details concerning the placing of the heating apparatus 
have been given above. 

5L — Whatever kind of apparatus is in use, too sudden changes of temperature 
must be avoided, not only during transitional periods such as spring and autumn 
but also during the months when heating isr equired. In winter, the temper- 
ature must be kept constant at night as well as in the daytime. The reasons 
for this have been given above, in the chapter dealing with the relations between 
temperature changes and variations of the hygrometrlc reading. 

VentilatioB® 

52® — Under these conditions, ventilation should receive equal, if not greater, 
attention. All ventilation systems that bring about too sudden changes in the 
hygrometrlc ratio must be avoided. In particular, window ventilation— which 
means letting in air of a temperature and hygrometric condition appreciably 
different from those of the air in the room— fs to be eschewed whenever the air 
can he renewed in other ways, e.g. doors, air-inlets, etc. Draughts, we would 
repeat, are extremely dangerous. 

Draughts® . 

53. — At all times of the year and at all hours of the day, care should be taken 
to detect draughts, whether caused by the heating system, as we have already 
pointed out, or due to any other reason whatsoever. There should be constant 


76 


THE CONSERVATION- O F - P A I N'T I NG S 


ir — ^ 


supervision as well as attention to particular cases. A piece of cord or ribbon 
held at one end against the wall wherever a picture is hung is a valuable help 
in detecting draughts. By this means, danger spots can be located and remedies 
sought. Pending a new lay-out to eliminate draughts and should no remedy 
be found, the best thing to do is to take especially sensitive objects away from 
the danger spots. We might add that air currents are appreciably reduced 
by means of curtains across the entries to the room. 

To keep atmospheric conditions as constant as possible, insulating substances 
(cork, celotex, etc.) are available for the walls. These may often be used in an 
existing building. In connection with the circulation of visitors, certain changes 
might be made in order to condemn entry doors, which in any case are best 
reduced to a minimum. 

Regiilarisation of hygrometric conditions. 

54. — One of the improvemente that can be made in existing buildings is a 
process for obtaining an appreciable degree of regularlsation of the hygrometric 
conditions of exhibition rooms. Many museums have a stock of pictures, 
textiles or other objects which for some reason or other find no place in the 
exhibition rooms. These objects, often packed in chests, cupboards or other 
articles of furniture stowed away in cellars or attics, are a very valuable asset 
that can be called upon for conditioning the air of the exhibition rooms. It 
should be possible to store all these objects in warehouses in which the air of 
the exhibition galleries, as soon as the humidity reaches the stipulated level, 
could be made to circulate. The ventilators used to stimulate the circulation 
of the air ought not to be set in action (automatically, by hygrostats) until the 
atmospheric conditions of the gallery necessitate the action of the drying or 
moistening powers of the hygroscopic matter. With this system, it must be 
realised that the reserve stocks will also enjoy improved conditions, on account 
of the reciprocal action taking place between them and the objects in the gallery. 

55. — This method, in conjunction with a vaporiser, has been adopted in the 
Hampton Court Orangery, London, where the Mantegna cartons are on view. 
Like most orangeries, this building has a glass wall to the south, far too big to 
allow pictures to be hung. Before the air-conditioning apparatus was fitted, 
the degree of relative humidity varied between 30 and 90 %. At present, during 
nine months of the year, these variations can be kept within 10%; in July. 





77 


THE C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 




August and September, the absolute humidity outside is too high for the canvases 
to react adequately. But even during those months the regulator ought to 

make it possible to keep hygrometric variations down to 20 %. 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ The most frequent air-conditioning problems are thus connected with existing 

buildings which do not permit of a full, rational equipment. It has already 
been pointed out that the cost of such an equipment with the appropriate insu- 
lation m the case of a new building is unavoidably so high as to make a compro- 
1 mise the most usual solution. To obtain ideal conditions, with not more than 

one or two degrees of heat variation and four degrees of humidity variation 
throughout the year, the first step would be to insulate the building by means 
I of cork or some such substance, equip all the entries with air-traps, in fact, 

ji treat the building as though it were nothing more or less than a refrigerator. 

I There are few examples of museums built in this way. ^ 

[ Perhaps one of the nearest approaches to perfection is the new annex of the 

British Museum Library, built of insulating substances (cork, etc.) and fitted 

with air-conditioning apparatus, including refrigerators. 

The only cases we can deal with here are examples of partial conditioning that 

will serve as illustrations of our theoretical remarks. 

' The new Museum of Art at Portland (Oregon) is fitted with a cornplete system 

of ventilation which forces the air through filters and works entirely autoina- 

tically. There is no refrigeration, but the town water, the temperature of which 
^ is 14 ‘’C., can beused forthedispersionapparatusinveryhot weather. Through- 

i; out the year, the relative humidity inside the building is said not to vary more 

i than 15%. _ . . 

!i A decrease of relative humidity, due to the heating, is the system adopted in 

i, a small room of the National Museum at Copenhagen; the hygrometric reading 

I varies between 45 % and 65 %. The necessary heating is obtained by means 

I of a small electric radiator controlled by a hygrostat which turns the current on 

I when the humidity reaches 65 % or so. 

I In some of the Berlin museums in hot, damp weather, cool air Is taken from 

) the cellars where the temperature is low. This system, however, would presu- 

! mably be less efficient in long periods of damp heat. 


i 



CHAPTER VIII 



LOCAL PROTECTIVE AND PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES 


56* — Various systems of keeping pictures protected from atmospheric varia- 
tions have been advocated. In the chapter on general environmental conditions 

conditions which are often unattainable in the premises as a whole — we 
mentioned the possibility of local protection by air-conditioned show-cases. 
Means of protecting each Individual picture have also been studied — covering 
the surface or the back, or placing the picture in an air-tight frame. 

Some restorers have thought it possible to preserve pictures by coating the 
back with a water-tight substance with an oil, wax, or paraffin base. The 
panel would be insulated at the front by its own varnish and at the back by 
this layer, and would thus be protected from the surrounding humidity. But 
as it is impossible — the experiment would be risky — to dry a picture completely, 
the internal humidity will try to escape as soon as the temperature rises. If 
the protective layers are elastic, swellings will occur; if they are not, crackle 
will develop, especially in the front varnish. There will also be fermentation 
inside the confined space. 

Sticking paper on the back is not an advisable remedy, for it warps the panel 
and produces a network of cracks that let in humidity. The use of tow is no 
better a cure. 

These observations justify our conclusion that nothing should be done which 
might hamper the normal ventilation of the picture. 

We must nevertheless mention the experiments made in recent years in 
Canadian galleries where pictures have been placed in sealed frames. In the 
Victoria and Albert Museum, forty years ago, a Turner was submitted to the 
same treatment, and has since showed no signs of deterioration. Covering the 
back of the picture with tin-foil has also been recommended; but in that case, 
all the humidity in the support, priming and paint-layer must escape through 
the front. 


79 


THE CONSERVAT ION OF PAINTINGS 


Protective Glazing. 

57. — Glass prevents the picture from being properly seen, on account of 
reflections. This disadvantage can be reduced by slightly inclining the picture 
if the bottom part of the walls and the floor are mat and dark in colour. 

In towns where the atmosphere Is heavily charged with dust and harmful 
gases, valuable pictures should be protected by glass. _ Pictures on wood, which 
are especially sensitive, particularly when showing signs of decay, would also 
be more effectively protected against sudden changes of temperature if placed 
in glass-covered containers. 

By a suitable device fixed to the edges of the picture, the paint must be kept 
away from the glass. The front of wood panels may be found to be within a 
centimetre of the protecting glass due to the “movement” of the wood. 
Contact of any kind may cause the varnish and even the paint-layer to dete- 
riorate. (During transport, the glass must, of course, be removed in order to 
avoid risks of breakage.) 

The glass must be of good quality and smooth surface. Some glass may 
show crystallisation phenomena or retain humidity. This will be noticed only 
after a time and faulty glass should be replaced. Consequently, all protective 
glass must be kept under constant and scrupulous attention. 

It might be advisable to arrange for the glass support to open and shut like 
a window, so that whenever necessary the picture may be examined more 

closely. _ . _ . . 

For pictures that are more particularly exposed to contact with visitors, 
glass is obviously an effective protection. 

Generally speaking, air-tight sealing is to be avoided. 

Several attempts have been made to get rid of the disadvantages of glass by 
applying a very thick layer of varnish to act as a protective coat. The method 
has, however, the following drawbacks: a) the varnish gradually turns yellow; 
b) deterioration of the paint layer may occur, due to evaporation of the essential 
oils; c) the thickness of the protective layer Is often more of a nuisance than 
glass, as it blurs the brush-work and texture of the painting. 

Framing. 

58. — It goes without saying that we shall deal with this question purely 
from the standpoint of the picture and its conservation, without entering into 
details of the aesthetic effect of the various kinds of frame. Whatever kind is 


80 




THE C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N 0 F PAINTINGS 

■ '" " ' '"‘ ■ ' '' ■■■/ 

] ; ; used, the first requisite is that the rebate should be so designed that^ the ‘ ' move- 

, ment” of the wood— of the frame or of the picture (wooden panel or canvas I 

, stretcher) cannot cause accidents round the edges of the painting and . does 

I not hamper the contraction and expansion of the painted panel. The rebate 

. ' should always be about one centimetre larger than the picture; if there is no 

I play, paintings on wood may get wedged and become distorted, and canvaseS: 

[ cannot be restretched. It is a good plan to put pieces of cork or rubber between 

the edge of the picture and the rebate. The state of conservation of the frame 
^ should be carefully examined, especially from the standpoint of parasites which 

can easily use the frame as a starting point for an attack on the picture. Should 
it be necessary to treat the wood of the frame with insecticides or impregnating 
substances, the picture must be removed from the vicinity, as the fumes may 
cause deterioration of the colours. 

Fixing of pictures in frames. 

59. — Any method of fixing that involves shaking the picture must be avoided, 
as when the picture is put into the frame or taken out of it fragments of paint 
may quite possibly become detached. 

Instead of nails, steel springs should be used, with screws (1). This method 
also has the advantage of allowing the wooden panels some freedom of movement, 
as they have a tendency to warp, and often crack if held too tightly in the frame. 

In transport, however, when the picture is left in its frame, the latter must be 
kept immobile, so as to avoid shaking the picture. 

Neither nails nor screws must ever be driven into the wood of the panel or 
the canvas support or the cradling. 

The system of extensible frames fitted with keys driven in with a hammer is 
not recommended unless the keys can be suitably adjusted to avoid hampering 
the free play of the panel. 

Protection of the back of the picture by sticking paper on the frame is to be 
avoided. Better protection against dust and sudden temperature changes is 
afforded by porous fabric for wood paintings or a sheet of plywood. 

To ensure canvas paintings against shocks or other accidents, sheets of cork 
or plywood may in some cases be applied to the back, as near as possible to the 
canvas, but not touching; a tight fit is to be avoided. 


(I) TKe steel springs should always be removed when the picture is packed for transport. 



81 


6 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 

: Alr-tiglit sealing must in all cases be avoided, on account of the danger of 
biological growths. 

Nothing should ever be stuck direct on the back of the canvas, as additions 
of this kind easily show through and stand out in relief on the front surface. 


Hangings 

60^ — Pictures should never be fastened flat against the walls; there should 
always be free circulation of air behind the support. 

In accordance with the detailed instructions in the paragraph on' the heating 
and hygiene of exhibition rooms, great care should be taken to examine the 
condition of the wall on which the picture is to be hung, especially from the 
standpoint of humidity. It should not be exposed to draughts or the direct 
rays of a heating element. 

Good ventilation conditions can easily be obtained by slightly tilting the 
picture forwards; this also keeps it freer from dust. 

In general, pictures should be hung in such a way as to be easily taken down 
in case of fire. How can this condition, in the case of small pictures, be recon- 
ciled with the necessity of protecting them against theft} They might be hung 
in groups of two or three on a common rod fastened to their frames. If this 
is done, a single picture cannot be taken away without removing a whole set, 
which would doubtless attract the attention of the attendants. 

61. — Whatever system of hanging is adopted— horizontal rod fixed on a 
level with the cornice of the room with hanging vertical bars fitted with the 
Boyer system; metal rail to receive either the picture hook or the suspension 
bar; direct fixing to the wall by means of hooks, etc.— special precautions must 
be taken if the gallery is near a busy thoroughfare. The vibration caused by 
the passage of heavy vehicles can cause serious damage to pictures. This 
vibration can be absorbed by small cork or rubber pads, inserted m the hanging 
system at the various contact points, and similar pads may be placed between 
the wall and the bottom of the frame. 

General cleaning of the premises. 

62. — During cleaning, care should be taken to raise as little dust as possible 
and draughts should be avoided. It Is recommended to use vacuum cleaners 
and damp sawdust for sweeping up. 



THE- CONSERVATION OF P A .! NT IN G S / 

Watch, should be , kept, ■ however, for air eddies and drying of the atmosphere 
due to the use of vacuum cleaners, especially the movable type; these disad- 
vantages can be greatly reduced by the installation of a system of fixed suction 
points in various parts of the room or preferably in the corridors. 

Dusting the picture surface {see also Chapters XI and XU), 

63* — Paintings should be dusted only in exceptional circumstances, under 
the supervision of the restorer. For even the use of very soft brushes or cotton- 
wool, which is the best substance to use for this purpose, may damage the 
varnish. Particles of paint, even, may often be brushed off; and usually 
only the specialist will notice this. Dusting must definitely be regarded as 
an extremely delicate business and must not be entrusted to an inexperienced 
staff. 

A preparation tha tcan often be recommended, but which only the restorer 
should apply, is a mixture of highly rectified paraffin oil and a little beeswax | 

or paraffin wax; a plug of cotton-wool wrapped in wash-leather is dipped in 
the liquid and wiped over the picture, which is thus slightly moistened. The 
surface is then polished dry, gently and without pressure. This process 
eliminates superficial dirt as well as “bloom” (on this point and on “regen- 
eration” see additional details in the chapter on the maladies and treatment 
of the varnish layer). 

It is perhaps not superfluous to issue a warning against a method of cleaning 
pictures still in use in recent years in many galleries — washing the painted 
surface with soap and water. The evil effects of this system are not immedia- 
tely apparent; but the water may penetrate by capillary attraction through the 
slightest cracks or fissures in the paint film as far as the priming, which means 
that sooner or later the film will become detached or swollen, not to mention 
the bad effects on the varnish. 

Conservation in store-rooms* 

64* — Pictures which are not being exhibited should be stored in accordance 
with the same principles, especially since the majority of galleries have nowadays 
adopted a system of hanging pictures with spaces between them, which means 
that a fairly large stock of valuable works must be kept in store-rooms. As they 
will have to be consulted from time to time, these works must be stored in such 


83 


a way as to be easily available for that purpose. For these two reasons— 
conservation and facility of consultation the organisation of store-rooms 

needs careful study. -n l j 

If the pictures are stacked against the walls, serious damage will be caused 
by friction and the lack of air and light. In the chapter dealing with the paint 
layer, we shall study the change in colour of oil-paintings kept in the dark. 
Painted canvases should never be left without their frames and on no account 
should they be rolled up. The latter method of storage is a great^ temptation, 
as a great many canvases can be stored in a limited space; but this advantage 
cannot make up for the very serious and often irreparable risks of damage 
incurred by canvases rolled round wooden cylinders placed on supports; the 
priming, which thus forms the outside layer, sags and splits, the paint layer 
cracks when the canvas is straightened out, and the lack of ventilation favours 
the formation of mould, which attacks the constituent parts. 

These old-fashioned methods of conservation make it impossible to consult 
the documents freely, and aggravate deterioration; they also prevent systematic 
supervision of the pictures that are stacked together. If deterioration is nipped 
in the bud, it may usually be cured without great risk and at comparatively 
low cost, and for this reason it is always better to adopt a storage system which 
allows the pictures to be frequently and easily inspected. Many modern 
museums have equipped their store-rooms with parallel vertical metal frames 
fitted with a grill, on which a number of pictures may be hung. The grills 
are fairly near each other and are fitted with castors that slide along rails in the 
floor and at the top with pulleys that move along an iron bar across the ceiling. 
Each grill can be slid out for inspection of the pictures. So that every canvas 
may be properly lit, the grills must be perpendicular to the window. 

In connection with the hygiene of the store-rooms, the same rules should be 
observed as for the exhibition rooms, as regards cleaning, heating and venti- 
lation. 


CHAPTER IX 


PROTECTION AGAINST FIRE 


65« — Although fires of all kinds are relatively common, they always break 
out unexpectedly or at least take unawares those whose duty it is to watch 
over the safety of a building. So the first precaution against fire consists in 
never losing sight of its possibility. 

As regards museums, damage done to a work or art by fire cannot really 
be compensated even by the most generous insurance. And as most of the 
objects in museums are valued extremely high, it is natural for insurance com- 
panies to cover themselves by demanding very heavy premiums. For this 
reason, when drawing up its budget, the museum should always bear in mind 
that the genuinely effective measures of protection against fire, are not so much 
insurance on a liquid capital as material guarantees of the safety of the objects 
themselves, which, if destroyed, can never be replaced. 

To meet the requirements of an effective organisation for the prevention of 
fire, the following rules must first be observed in connection with the structure 
and equipment of the building. 

Situation. 

66. — Buildings containing works of great value must be well separated from 
any structure from which a fire might spread to them. 

Building Materials. 

67. — Inflammable materials must not be used, except when absolutely 
indispensable. In any case, fireproof preparations should be used to make the 
wood, textiles, etc., non-inflammable and consequently to protect walls, doors, 
frames; attention should be given to the possibility of applying a fireproofing 
substance to the backs of pictures, avoiding direct contact. 


85 


THE C- 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 


Painting* 

68* — Preparations used in the decoration of doors® windows® exhibition 
furniture® etc. must contain no nitro-cellulose or other inflaminable solutions. 

Decorations* 

69* — Curtains, blinds and other decorations are to be avoided when there 
are no imperative reasons for their presence; in any case, they must be fireproofed, 
as they easily catch fire and are therefore dangerous centres. 

Fire sections* 

70. — By means of fireproof walls, partitions or doors, the building should 
be divided into a number of sections; should fire break out in one of these, 
means will be available to localise it and prevent it from spreading to the other 
sections. 

Air ducts. 

71. — Should there be one section of the building that might become a kind 
of active chimney in case of fire, special care must be taken to avoid the slightest 
communication between that section and the others. 

Danger spots. 

72. — It should not be forgotten that every building contains a number of 
danger spots where fire would rage with particular violence. Typical danger 
spots are the store-rooms which contain packing cases and other accessories 
connected with transport or the equipment of the gallery and the restoration 
studios. These rooms should be completely isolated from the others, so as 
to avoid all risk of the fire spreading to the rest of the building. 

In an old building used as a museum, there is the most serious danger of 
fire in the attics, where dust accumulates and where repair rooms are often 
found. It is highly advisable to install these workshops, not in the upper part 
of the building but in the basements, or better still, outside the museum 
building. 


86 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


Boiler rooms® 

73® — ' The boiler rooms also must be carefully insulated. The hot- water 
system is much better than the hot air system in this respect, as the latter may 
reach temperatures that would set fire to particularly inflammable substances 
in the path of the hot air. A principle that cannot always be applied but which 
provides excellent protection, consists in planning the boiler rooms in a special 
building separated from the gallery. 

Housing of the staff® 

74® — Premises housing the museum staff should be so situated as to prevent 
any fire which might break out in them from spreading to the other offices. 
There should be a regulation providing for the periodical inspection of these 
quarters. 

Fire due to optical causes. 

75. — Fire may sometimes be started by a magnifying glass left on a work- 
table, or by the concentration of rays of sunlight due to a glass jug or even the 
window-panes. 

Films. 

76. — Special precautions should be taken in connection with photographic 
films (e.g. X-ray films, which, moreover, it would be advisable to keep in the 
form of paper prints). It should be forbidden to keep films in the work- 
rooms, if no special precautions have been taken for their storage. 

Inflammable liquids. 

77. — Motor-cars have become so popular that there is always the possibility 
of finding some day that supplies of petrol or oil have been stored near the 
gallery or even in one of its out-buildings. The most scrupulous care must 
be taken to prevent such a practice. 

Electrical plant. 

78. — Electric lighting and motive power, which are so reliable and harmless 
when fitted with every guarantee as regards insulation and supervision, may 



87 



EMERGENCY FIRE ' EXTINGUISHERS 


Special use, 


Advantages 


Disadvantages 


Liquid extinguishers, 
L Water buckets. 


Indispensable in all cases, 


Harmful for paintings on wood and on canvas unless 
the latter are protected by a coating of wax.. 

Undoubtedly the most effec- Leaves an acid or alkaline film on the painting. ,— 
tive extinguishers in the major- 
ity of cases. 

Non-corrosive. 


2. Carbonate of soda extinguishers, 


For rapid extinction, 


Local jets on delicate ob- 
jects. 


3, Water and 


Should, 


4. Small manuals. 


as harmful. 


Dry extinguishers* 

1. Blankets to smother a fire. 

2. Sand buckets. 

3. Powders in special containers thrown by hand. 

4. Powders projected automatically. 


Specially suitable for electrical 
plant. 


C. — ' Extinguishers containing highly volatile 
liquids* 

1. Garbon-tetrachlorlde. 


Suitable for local outbreaks of COCL, a toxic gas, is formed by heat. 

fire. Softens the paint layer, etc. and exposes it to damage 

by smoke. 

HBr, a corrosive and asphyxiating gas, may be formed 
by heat. 


Workshops, laboratories and 
electrical plant. 


2. Mixtures containing methyl-bromide. 

3, Carbonic acid, 

(These substances can be thrown from i 
hand container, by a small pump or auto- 
matically. 


Foam extinguishers* ' 

Bottles containing CO a with a colloid, producing 
a neutral foam, would be an appreciable progress 
as compared with the bicarbonate (acid) type 
of extinguisher. 


Burning petrol 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


cause the most serious fires in the absence of such guarantees. To avoid this 
danger, the following rules should be observed: 

Electric wiring must never be laid on wood or other inflammable substances. 
If there is no way of avoiding this, the wires must be insulated with a substance 
that is both an electric insulator and fireproof. , 

Wires must never pass near curtains, hangings or other decorations. 

The greatest precaution must be exercised when fitting wires in damp places. 
The humidity, besides setting up conductive areas in materials that are poor 
conductors when dry, may cause oxidation of the leads and thus decrease their 
working cross-section; their resistance will be increased and over-heating will 
take place. 

Special attention must be paid to fuses. There is sometimes a temptation, 
when a fuse has blown several times in succession, to replace it with a heavy 
duty fuse. This is extremely dangerous. Only scrupulously calibrated fuses 
should be employed, so that other kinds can only with difficulty be used in 
their stead. 

Lightning conductors. 

79. — Although cases of fire caused by lightning are comparatively rare, 
it would be a mistake to neglect methods of avoiding this risk. Lightning is 
dangerous even for buildings equipped with conductors; it is even more dan- 
gerous when the equipment is faulty. The following fundamental rules should 
therefore be observed when fitting lightning conductors: 

Top elements. — A conductor (generally horizontal) with a thick cross-section, 
should be placed in the main axis of the roof; vertical or oblique bars should 
run from the chief conductor to the highest parts of the building — turrets, 
gables, angles or cornices, anything which projects beyond the general line of 
the building. 

The down leads should be composed of a series of vertical bars connecting 
the upper conductor with the ground; their number will be in proportion to 
the size of the building, and they should preferably be placed at the angles or 
cornices that jut out from the general structure. 

Multiplicity of verticals is one of the mam guarantees of the efficiency of 
lightning conductors. To avoid the danger of lateral discharge, the down 
leads should be as numerous and as nearly vertical as possible, without bends 
or twists or any sudden change of direction that might increase their inductance. 


90 



Metallic masses, such as steel girders, water-pipes or other , pipes of any kind 
must be connected to the conductors so as to provide a closed circuit in case 
of lateral discharge; this is always less dangerous than a simple one-way connec- 
tion of the metallic mass to the conductor. 


Earth. ■ — The earth resistance should be as small as possible; in other words, 
the area of the surface making contact with the ground should be. asTarge as 
possible. The best way of achieving this is to connect together all the down 
leads into the town water mains. When this: is impossible, it is inadvisable 
to use a metal sheet buried in more or less damp earth; the best method is to 
dig a shallow trench all round the building to contain an iron bar to which all 
the down leads can be connected; the earth will be all the more effective if this 
bar is connected to bundles of iron wire, sheet iron or other elements likely 
to, increase the surface in contact with the ground and consequently the conduc- 
tance of the system. 


Supervision. 

8i« — Considerable risks may arise when plumbers, slaters or other workmen 
are working on the roofs or Inside the building. On such occasions, the closest 
supervision by an official of the museum is a necessity. Smoking must be 
strictly prohibited. A bucket of water must always be kept in the immediate 
vicinity of the place where work with a blow-pipe is being carried on. Rags 
soaked in oil and bottles containing inflammable liquids must always be placed 
even temporarily in a metal box with a lid. 

Copyists working in galleries also bring inflammable material with them““ 
petrol, oil, varnish, rags impregnated with volatile substances, and so on. The 
supervisor of the department must therefore exercise a close watch on the 
premises during such work and must see that no inflammable material remains 
in the room after the copyists have left. 

The only way of avoiding these risks is by means of perfectly organised 
supervision, which must be constant during visiting hours and should take the 
form of repeated rounds when the museum is closed to the public. Such 
inspection should be particularly strict immediately after the closing of the 
gallery, for then anything kindled by a cigar or any other means is easily detected. 
The use of clocks for timing the rounds will ensure the regularity of this form 
of supervision. 


91 


T H E CONSERVATION O F P A I N T I N G' S 


.Methods of combatiiig fire* 

8L ■ — Various types of fire-alarm — smoke detectors or apparatus reacting 
to abnormal increases of temperature — have been suggested. However good 
they may be, it should never be forgotten that nothing can take the place of 
properly organised personal supervision. 

As soon as fire has broken out, the local fire-station must be informed imme- 
diately. Its telephone number should be found on all the telephone points 
connected to the exchange. 

' In the meantime, hand appliances should be used — extinguishers placed at 
various points in the rooms, corridors and staircases; fireproof cloth can be 
extremely useful for protecting both objects and persons likely to be in danger. 
The sooner action is taken the better; promptness depends on the previous 
organisation, down to the smallest detail, of collective fire-drill which must be 
practised from time to time by the entire staff of the gallery. The extinguishers 
must also be periodically examined by specialists from the firms which manu- 
facture them. 

Water, which is an excellent extinguisher when under sufficient pressure, 
may do as much damage as fire to the objects in the museum. The table 
given in this chapter shows what extinguishing substances can be recommended 
or are to be avoided and in what circumstances they may be used. 

Closed rooms and safe storage of objects of value* 

82. — The most valuable collections, especially those which are most likely 
to suffer from the effects of fire, should be housed in rooms that may be complete- 
ly closed after visiting hours. Air is an active agent in the spreading of fire; 
the doors and windows of these rooms, therefore, when shut, should be complete- 
ly air-tight. In order to inspect the rooms without the necessity of entering 
them, the doors should be fitted with thick glass panes, through which all 
points of the room are visible. All exits must be kept closed, even when fire 
has broken out. Enough carbon-dioxide should be Introduced through a 
suitable aperture, to keep the oxygen in the air (which mixes with the carbon- 
dioxide) down to a level below the comibustion level (12%). The fire will 
thus be extinguished without interfering with any object in the room. Of 
course, care must be taken that nobody is shut up in the room. 

In spite of every precaution and everything that may be done, it sometimes- 
happens that the fire becomes so fierce that the only thing to do is to salvage 


92 



as many objects as possible. In anticipation of such cases, the most valuable 
obj’ects should be so placed as to be easily removed if necessary. 


Risfes of bombardiiieiit. 

83e — The last remark is particularly important in connection with risks of 
aerial bombardment or similar incidents which accompany civil disorder or 
armed conflicts. The provision of shelters in basements, the drawing up of 
a list of the most valuable works to be taken down when the air-raid warning 
is given, with precise details of how they are to be removed, should form part 
of the protective programme of all museums. 

The same observation holds good in connection with the isolation of the 
building from public services and from any structure that might be regarded 
as a military objective in war time. 

The review Mouseion has undertaken to publish a series of systematic and 
informatory studies on the material protection of works of art in time of war. 
There is also a considerable amount of graphic and photographic material 
already available on the same subject. We regard it as essential to draw special 
attention to this particular problem, even though it cannot be dealt with in 
detail in this Manual which is devoted rather to the protection of paintings 
against natural causes of deterioration. 



CHAPTER X 


TRANSPORT AND PACKING OF PAINTINGS 


The remarks made in the chapter on ‘‘Surroundings” may be recalled here. 
Every picture on ^vood or canvas is exposed to two main classes of risks during 
transport from one place to another (and even from one room to another) — 
hygrometric and climatic changes, on the one hand, and shocks, jolts and 
vibrations due to travelling, on the other. 

Precaiitioes before packing. 

84. — Without embarking on a discussion of the advisability of transport, 
e.g. in the case of international exhibitions, we must remind curators of the 
dangers incurred by any work of art temporarily removed from its customary 
habitat. The first precaution to be taken Is a scrupulous examination of the 
picture’s powers of resistance to the external agents and phenomena to which 
it will be subjected: condition of the various constituent elements — support, 
priming, paint layer and varnish. If necessary, any part that might be detached 
during the journey (flaking, for instance) should be fixed and consolidated. A 
painting which is still fresh or a recently re- varnished, rellned or transferred 
picture cannot be transported in an air-tight packing without serious risks. 
The hygienic conditions of the destination should also be examined. 


Packing technique and materials. 

85. — When the principle of transport has been agreed upon, the assistance 
of specialists will be sought, so as to have every guarantee as regards the tech- 
nique and the materials used. The premises where the pictures are packed 
'’^ should also fulfil the required hygienic conditions, so that the air-tight cases 
in which the pictures are to be kept for a considerable time will contain an 




95 


T H E C 0 N S' E R V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 


■atnfiospliere whose hygrometric conditions are suitable for the proper conser- 
vation of the canvases. ' ' 

In general, for sea transport or for a long iourney, paintings on wood or 
canvas should be hermetically sealed in cases lined with tin plate, zinc or copper 
and preferably r'ubber soldered. The first packing is best carried out dry, 
with no other material than pads fixing the canvas or the panel in their cases 
so as to avoid all vibration; for this purpose, the pictures should be wrapped in' 
vellum and then in waterproof canvas. In this way, several small pictures can 
conveniently be packed into one case. This case is then placed in a second case 
of thicker wood and of much larger dimensions, in such a way that there is' 
enough space for it to rest on a soft, elastic substance on every side. If several 
works are to be transported, it is advisable to group the double cases together 
in larger containers, hermetically sealed, i.e. lined with metal plates soldered 
together and closed by a lid similarly lined and soldered to the body of the 
container. The cases inside are separated from each other and from the outside 
walls by a soft, resilient packing. Zinc — admittedly more expensive than tin 
plate— is the best material to use in packing. 

Preveiitioii of vibration. , 

86. — In order to avoid the communication of vibration to the canvas, it has 
been suggested that a kind of sheath might be used, fitting exactly across the 
framework of the canvas at the back and at the front exerting slight pressure 
through a pad separated from the painted surface by a sheet of vellum; this 
system applies equal pressure to both surfaces of the canvas. 

Frames and glass. 

87. - It is always advisable to pack the frames separately when there is no 
danger involved in taking the pictures out of their frames. Pictures under 
glass should also be unframed and the glass packed separately, with the usual 
precautions: thick paper stuck over the whole surface of the glass and elastic 
packing in a strong case. 

Hermetically sealed packings. 

88. — Hermetic sealing of the outer cases is especially important in sea trans- 
port. The place where the containers are to be kept during the crossing must 


96 




T HE; CO N S E R V A T I Q N 0 F ^ P A IN TIN G S 

be examined, so as to avoid the proximity of machinery, on account of the danger 
to the sealed-up paint that would be caused by too high a temperature. 

Special attention must be paid to the quality of the packing materials, which 
should be perfectly dry, especially for hermetic sealing. 

UnpacHng* 

89 . — Unpacking is a crucial operation. If the staff who packed the pictures 
is not available for the unpacking, the lending museum should send along with 
the pictures a detailed account of how they were packed, to avoid blunders 
in handling them. We have already pointed out that the hygienic conditions 
of the rooms in which the pictures are to remain for some time must be pre- 
viously ascertained; but it is also important to make sure that the place of 
unpacking shows atmospheric conditions as similar as possible to those of the 
spot where the pictures were packed. 

Transport and acclimatisation. 

90. — The foregoing precautions, which apply more specially to transport 
from one museum to another, are applicable also to works of art taken away 
from their original home to be permanently hung in a museum. It has been 
observed that works which have travelled a lot are less sensitive to changes in 
the surroundings than those which have remained for a long time in the same 
place. This latter category includes those pictures which have been for cen- 
turies in the home intended for them by the artist — castle, church, etc. Special 
precautions should consequently be taken to get such works gradually accustomed 
to the atmosphere of the museum room and during the acclimatisation period 
they should be kept under constant supervision. 

An account of the general principles and a mass of technical information 
on the transport and packing of works of art will be found in the studies men- 
tioned in the appended Bibliography. But we should like to point out here 
that whenever a picture is removed, even temporarily, it is liable to deterioration. 
Should it be necessary, for purposes of inspection, photography or for any 
other reason, to remove a picture from the wall and take it out of its frame, 
special precautions should immediately be taken for the whole period of such 
operations. For instance, a sheet of wood fibre should be applied to the back 
of the panel and stuck down at the corners with adhesive tape. In short, every 



97 


7 


T HE C ON S E RVATION OF PAINTINGS 


endeavour should be made to maintain the conditions of the usual surroundings 

as far as possible. (Cf. § 84). 

Special measures to be taken in war time® 

SI® — In the same series of articles will also be found accounts of the precau- 
tions to be taken and the packing systems to be adopted when works of art are 
threatened with bombardment. As regards the problems that concern us here, 
a niimber of principles will be found in tbe articles based on recent experiments 
dealing with: the preliminary choice of works for evacuation, plans for salvaging 
pictures from the inside of the gallery, methods of packing to avoid vibration, 
the provision of refuges, and so on. (See also § 83.) 



98 


“ 7 ' 


PART TWO 
RESTORATION 






CHAPTER XI 

GEIEMAL PKINCIPIES CONCERNING THE RESTORATION 

OF PAINTINGS 


Coiiser¥atioii and Restoration. 

92. — As will have been seen from the chapters contained in the first part of 
this manual, no rigid distinction can be made between conservation and restor- 
ation where a work of art is concerned. Conservation involves various kinds 
of treatment which may even result in certain changes or prevent certain forms 
of decay in the object, but none of these treatments can be said to constitute 
restoration work properly so called. Similarly, restoration — as we understand 
it with regard to a painting — may consist in applying a treatment which in no 
way changes the appearance of a picture but which goes far beyond the scope 
of mere upkeep and, consequently, the competence of the uninitiated. When 
classifying the various problems to be discussed, the authors of this manual 
thought it more rational to devote the first part to everything appertaining to 
the doctrine of conservation, to the hygiene of paintings housed in museums, and 
to the equipment, processes and conditions of examination which make it pos- 
sible to formulate a pertinent diagnosis as to the condition of these works of 
art. The second part, on the other hand, will consist of a description of the 
operations which Incontestably require the services of a specialist, a technican, 
because they directly concern the physical structure of the work. Needless 
to say, doctrine, which is more or less theoretical, and practical methods cannot 
be separated, whatever the operation may be, since it is invariably a question 
of objects to be preserved not only for the sake of historical and scientific docu- 
mentation but also as testimonies of style and artistic conception. 

General Rules. 

93. — It must be pointed put and emphasised that, where the restoration of 
paintings is concerned, very few hard and fast rules exist and that most of the 
methods recommended have to be modified to suit each individual case. Fur- 


101 


The conservation of paintings 


tliermore, the needs which have to be met are often so contradictory and so 
incompatible that, in many instances, one has to be content with a compromise, 
which will no doubt be the lesser of two evils from which to choose. In reality, 
restoration — in the strict sense of the term — is impossible when it is a matter 
of dealing with damaged paintings, and, whatever form it may take, it will never 
be more than an attempt, an approximation. 

The success of a restoration depends less on the method employed than on 
the experience, skill and conscientious work of the person who applies it. ^ The 
treatment of valuable paintings should therefore- be entrusted only to specialists 
of unc|uestlonab!e repute or recommended by a national museum, or by a central 
organisation fully competent to propose a properly qualified restorer. 

Qualifications of the Restorer. 

94. — Every museum and every art gallery should have at least one good res- 
torer on its staff. Today, it is possible to find first-rate experts, thoroughly 
acquainted with the technique of the conservation and restoration of paintings; 
but large institutions are often obliged to seek the services of various specialists 
and must be able to rely on the constant collaboration of at least one or two 
restorers. The latter should be proficient professionals, possessing a complete 
knowledge of the different techniques of painting and familiar with all the 
materials used by artists. They should also be thoroughly initiated to the tech- 
nique of the old masters (this knowledge will be acquired, in part, by executing 
copies), to the history of art, besides an indispensable training in chemistry; 
needless to say, they should also have practical experience of all the processes 
of cleaning and restoration, including re-lining, the treatment of wood, etc. 

The Professional Training of Restorers. 

95. — We here touch upon the complex problem of the professional training 
of restorers, which has already formed the subject of an enquiry conducted by 
the International Museums Office (1). The recommendations and suggestions 
formulated by the most highly qualified authorities on this question point to 
the necessity of organising, in the leading museographlcal institutions, systematic 
courses of instruction planned for selected pupils who already present certain 
guarantees, not only from the point of view of knowledge and personal talent, 


(1) See Mouseioriy Vols. 19, 20, 21 and 22. 


102 


T HE CONSERVATION OF PAINT! N.G S 


but also from the standpoint of moral qualities. On the completion of these 
courses, diplomas would be awarded, as is already done in some countries in 
connection with the professional training of museum curators. 

This idea originated in the principle that one of the gravest dangers which 
threaten works of art lies in the treatment to which they are subjected by incom'- 
petent restorers. Such a state of affairs — which it is surprising to see prevailing 
in these days when, compared with the past, far more importance is attached to 
the value and significance of these irreplaceable documents— is undoubtedly due 
to faulty organisation, which might easily be remedied if systematic action were 
taken by the responsible departments. It is clear that it is no longer admissible 
that the community should derive practically no benefit from the experience 
of the expert restorer and that the results of this kind of work should be jealously 
guarded or, at most, communicated to a few initiated persons. It has also been 
pointed out that restorations were too often entrusted to painters who lacked 
the ability to produce original paintings and devoted their time to this work of 
reconditioning without any previous training. Some of them, no doubt, have 
acquired considerable skill, but very often to the detriment of the works on 
which they carried out their first experiments. It may be argued that there will 
have been no serious loss if these early experiments were made on paintings of 
no value. But, as repeatedly pointed out in these pages, it is rarely possible 
to decide with certainty that a work is valueless until it has been minutely exam- 
ined and cleaned with all the necessary care and observance of scientific 
principles. The number of masterpieces that have been permanently spoiled 
because nobody suspected the name of the author therefore makes it imperative 
that the greatest caution be exercised in the choice both of t.he restorer and of 
the methods adopted, even for paintings judged to be of only secondary value. 

Until this restorer’s diploma has been generally introduced, we may envisage 
the rational training, in the laboratories attached to the leading museums, of 
one or two restorers judiciously chosen for the qualifications indicated above. 

Technical Staff. 

96. — Besides the professional restorers, the technical staff of a gallery should 
include a re-lining expert. This expert would work in a special workshop and 
would also be entrusted with the treatment of blistered paintings and the stopping 
of holes, for the less serious cases. 

A third workshop, fitted up for all kinds of cabinet-work, would be occupied 


103 



by a wood- working expert; be would deal with panel paintings and should there- 
fore be a joiner or cabinet-maker with many years’ experience of wood, plywood, 
etc. The re-Iieing expert and the wood-worker should work in close collabo- 
ration, under the supervision of the restorer, and each would be required to 
train his own apprentices. 

The physico-chemical laboratory should, of course, be situated close to these 
workshops, so that the restorer may easily pass from one to the other to give his 
advice, carry out his investigations and generally help the staff working there. 
' Close collaboration should also be established with other official laboratories 
or industrial research centres. . 


Functions of the Restorer. 


97. — The restorer forms the natural link between the art historian (gallery 
director, professor of history of art) and the specialist in the physical and chem- 
ical sciences. After his weekly visits to the museum galleries, he will draw 
the curator’s attention to the paintings which, in his opinion, need the most 
urgent treatment. But though a really qualified restorer must be given the 
greatest possible latitude in the choice of the methods to be applied, it will be 
for the curator to decide how far a particular case of restoration is to be carried; 
the restorer should, for his own sake, Invariably arrange for a member of the 
museum staff to be present as a witness when he is engaged on particularly 
delicate work. 

In this connection, the old-fashioned custom of workshop secrets and mystery 
has fortunately given way to frankness and to the international exchange of 
experiences, as was shown, for example, by the International Conference held 
in Rome in 1930 under the auspices of the International Museums Office. 
Paintings as well as the restorer’s profession have had everything to gain since 
the problem is being discussed in this atmosphere of mutual confidence and 
since journals such as Technische Miiteilungen, Technical Studies and Mouseion 
are publishing the hitherto jealously guarded formulas, together with information 
on the improvements introduced into modern technique. In this respect, res- 
torers are now lagging only a short distance behind the medical profession. 

..The Task of the Restorer. 

98. — The task of the restorer may be divided into two parts : first, the con- 
servation or preservation of more or less sound paintings; second, the restoration 

104 


THE C 0 N S E R V A T ! '0 N OF P A ! N T I N G S 


or recoBstruction properly so called of unsound or damaged works: filling In of 
lacuna, retouching, etc. In its wider sense, the word ‘‘restoration” comprises 
both aspects of the work. [ 

Nowadays, few people will deny the need for taking measures to preserve j 

and conserve paintings (although, in some galleries, there are still certain ines^ f; 

timable masterpieces which are decaying because nobody dare touch them). , 

When a few years ago some European galleries were asked for permission for 
the taking of X-ray photographs of a large number of their pictures, for an 
American research institution, the main objection raised was that the paintings ; 

might be damaged while being moved. The request was, however, granted ; 

in respect of a certain number of paintings and the most notable discovery made 
when they were taken down from the position which they had occupied for j 

numbers of years was that many showed dangerous blistering and other signs | 

of deterioration which had been overlooked during the successive inspections j 

in loco; it was therefore possible to arrest the process of deterioration and to r 

treat the paintings before it was too late. ‘ 

And yet there are still quite a number of people who look upon these measures | 

of restoration with a certain mistrust; it is true that, up to fairly recent times, J 

many errors were committed in the execution of this work. It was, however, j 

because the appropriate conservation measures had not been taken that it was I 

later necessary to resort to restoration on a larger scale and, in many cases, the | 

cleaning, retouching and repainting operations were carried too far. I 

1 

Principles of Cleaning and Stripping. | 

99. — A few remarks concerning these two operations are here necessary in I 

order to define their scope and principle, although we shall return to the 
question in the chapters dealing with the practical methods that should be 
adopted. 

In contrast with dabbing (removal of the superficial coating of dirt), cleaning 
is generally understood to be the removal of the varnish. The complete removal 
of the varnish, retouching and repainting is generally known as stripping. 

With regard to the actual principle of the operation, details of which are given 
In Chapter XII, a fundamental question arises: should dark varnishes and other 
later additions be removed from old masterpieces? 

The standpoint of the scientist and of the artist of today may briefly be ex- | 

pressed as follows : the higher the artistic and colouristic value of a painting, the | 




105 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


less excuse will there be for allowing such disfiguration to subsist — -provided^ 
of course, that it can be removed without danger to the original. 

The day has passed when there was some justification for the belief that the 
cleaning of any picture was dangerous, just as a surgical operation endangered 
the life of a patient. But with improved modern methods, it may safely be said 
that the great majority of paintings can be cleaned without any danger. The 
primary interest of the artist and of the scholar lies essentially in the original 
condition' of a work. 

On the other hand, one can to a certain extent understand the feelings of the 
owner of a painting who venerates that “patina” (which goes so well with his 
antique furniture) still more than the Intention of the master. 

At any rate, and whatever point of view may prevail in a given case, the aim 
of the restorer is to save and respect every fragment that is left of the original work 
and to bring it out to its fullest advantage. There can be no fixed rule as to how 
this object is to be achieved. The most appropriate solution must be sought, 
with the help of the formulas and methods available for each individual case. 

Gaps. 

100- — The second important question to be considered is whether and to 
what extent the gaps in a painting should be replaced; the general aspect of this 
question was discussed in outline in Chapter 1. We have seen that this is a 
matter of taste and judgment, and sometimes of tact. The solution will be quite 
different according as it is a question of a narrow crack, the disappearance of 
a large portion of the subject, or even the total loss of half the painting. In the 
latter case, the picture must be left as it is and exhibited as a fragment, treatment 
being confined to the necessary measures of conservation. 

The measures taken will depend also on the purpose one has in view, or, more 
exactly, on what must be done, according to whether a picture is to be preserved 
for the sake of the subject, for its artistic value, for a museum or for a private 
owner. ■ 

It has recently been advocated that paintings should be left as they are and 
exhibited with all their ‘lacunae ” unconcealed. In support of this theory, it 
has been argued, as mentioned in Chapter I, that sculpture has long been exhi- 
bited unrestored. This argument is, however, invalidated by the fact that 
there is nothing whatsoever in the place of the missing portions of a piece of 
sculpture, whereas at the spot where a piece of paint is missing there is a patch 


106 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


of a definite form and colour, which plays a positive and unfortunate role in the 
picture as a whole. 

Treatment of Gaps- 

101- — There are some who maintain that after stopping a patch which has 
lost its paint-layer the patch should be left white. It is obvious that even a few 
small white stoppings will be sufficient to ruin the unity of a picture: as the 
result of a well-known optical illusion, a white patch on a dark ground appears 
to be larger than a darker patch of the same size. This may be proved by a 
simple experiment: as soon as the white patch is darkened it immediately ap- 
pears smaller. 

There are many ways of lessening the disturbing effect of the lacunae without 
concealing them completely. Some curators have had the fillings toned in 
what they call ‘‘neutral grey”. A neutral grey in a picture, however, is a fic- 
tion: it will always assume the complementary tones of the neighbouring 
colours, thus introducing an alien element into the painting. 

Another method, which seems to be more satisfactory, consists in painting 
the patch in the same brownish colour as the local underpaint, such as may be 
seen in a number of old pictures. This result may be obtained either by reconsti- 
tuting the contour, or by leaving the patch flat. 

An alternative solution would be to paint the patch in the same tone (but 
lighter) as local underpaint, that is to say in the same tone as the surrounding 
colour but just a shade lighter. 

Yet another method would be to match the surrounding colour without com- 
pleting the contour. 

These compromise methods are more suitable for primitives than for pictures 
of later periods where the naturalistic tangibility plays a greater part. But 
even if the colour and the modelling were absolutely matched, it would still be 
possible to make the retouching distinguishable if this were desired. They 
could, for example, be left either rougher or smoother than the original part of 
the painting, or they could be kept at a slightly lower level than the general 
surface of the paint-layer itself. 

Whichever method is adopted, the filling-ln should always be adjusted to 
the aesthetic and technical qualities of the picture; for example, no patch of 
lesser purity or inferior transparency than the remainder of the painting should 
be introduced. 


107 


A discreet restorer will always find some compromise which will please both the 
public— which merely wants to enjoy paintings without any disturbing factors — 
and the purist scholar, who, in addition, regards the pictures as objects of 
study. 

Contiributions made by the Auxiliary Sciences and Modem Technique. 

102. — By way of conclusion,, the progress made in recent years in the fiedl 
of picture restoring may be summed up as follows: 

■ The methods of investigation, and the measures, calculated to prevent ' the 
deterioration of paintings, as well as the means adopted for their conservation, 
have been greatly improved. 

The more it was realised that it was impossible to replace completely . any 
portion missing from an old masterpiece, so the sense of responsibility developed 
and greater and greater care was taken in the cleaning of paintings. Moreover, 
better and safer solvents have been found. 

Modern technique in the matter of reproduction has provided the technician, 
the curator and the historian with systems of recording that have proved entirely 
satisfactory. ■ 

Retouching is now done rather in the manner of inlay work, great care being 
taken not to cover any portions preserved in the original paint (as opposed to 
the former and coarser practice of overpainting more than was necessary). 

A more thorough knowledge of the style and technique of the old masters 
has led to a corresponding improvement in retouching, this work now being 
done in the same semi-transparent or glazing layers as those of the ori- 
ginal. 

The colour now used for retouching will, in all probability, not darken like 
the oil-colour formerly used. (Tempera is now used for the under-paint — resin 
and wax colours for the finishing glazes). 

Tinted varnishes, which were often used for veiling unsuccessful retouching, 
have consequently become obsolete and have been superseded by non-dark- 
ening and easily removable varnishes. The artificial mellow toning — ‘‘pa- 
tina” or “golden glow” — so often given to pictures during the XIXth century, 
is no longer tolerated, neither from the scientific and aesthetic standpoint, nor 
from the hygienic standpoint. 

Retouching can now be done with colours which can easily be removed without 
any danger to the original. 


T.H E . .. C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N 


F PAINT IN G S 


Retouching which matches too well with the colours of the original no longer 
constitutes a probleni, since the advancedi methods of detection now available 
make deception impossible. 

Whatever method may be adopted and provided that no damage of any kind 
is done to the original, the various systems of recording will always furnish the 
necessary data for ascertaining the condition of a painting before . and after 
stripping and before retouching and additions. 

* 

In the various sections of this chapter, we have merely outlined the programme 
of restoration work, indicating the conditions which curators and owners of 
works of art are entitled to lay down when they entrust an object to the care of 
a technician, and pointing out the guarantees offered to both sides by the present- 
day conception of restoration and by the scientific processes now used. The 
chapters that follow will examine in detail the processes and formulas which, 
for each of the constituent elements of a painting, ^ have proved ^successful in 
the different operations included m the expression restoration . 




CHAPTER XII 


MALADIES AND TREATMENT OF THE VARNISH LAYER 


Preliminary Observations. 

103. — The functions of the varnish are twofold: 1) To protect the paint from 
the pernicious influences of the atmosphere; 2) To restore to tarnished or sunk- 
in paint the luminosity and transparency originally intended by the artist. A 
third function which some people attribute to varnish, namely to give a general 
tint to a painting, holds good for only a limited number of pictures. It can safely 
be said that, in most cases, the yellowish tint of the varnishes to be seen on old 
paintings was not intended by the artist. 

Some early Italian gold grounds were originally covered with an intentionally 
tinted varnish. Before the colourless and non-oily spirit varnishes were invented 
many pictures had been varnished in their time with oil varnishes which, though 
unintended by the painter who applied this treatment, had a yellowish tint in 
themselves and went on yellowing with age. Deliberately tinted varnishes 
seem to reappear only in the XVIIIth century and remained in vogue throughout 
the XIXth century. 

It is not known exactly whether all paintings in early times were intended to 
be varnished. Some, perhaps, did not require the varnish to complete the 
optical effect of the luminosity and transparency of the paint, while others were 
probably intended to retain a certain mat effect. Nowadays, all paintings need 
some kind of protective layer, firstly because the atmosphere of industrial towns 
is vitiated to such an extent that it has become more and more dangerous to 
paintings, and, secondly, because the majority of old paintings have lost their 
original optical aspect as the result of some kind of cleaning, deterioration or 
natural ageing phenomena : the continuity of the binding material has suffered 
and has to be restored by varnish. 

The most common and most disturbing changes occurring on pictures 
— changes which seem to affect the paint layer itself— are, in reality, fortunately 
confined to the varnish layer and can be remedied fairly easily. 




A, --- COMPOSITION OF YAENISHES 


Sol¥e!its and Diluents* ^ ' 

104* — ■ AH varnishes consist of a substance which has the property of forming 
a film on drying, such as resin or wax dissolved in a suitable solvent. When 
oil is used as a solvent, the addition of a thinning substance, called a diluent, 
is necessary, and it is important that this substance should not be of such a nature 
as to soften the paint-layer; moreover, it should evaporate completely after 
application. — Examples: rectified oil of turpentine; rectified oil of petroleum; 
rectified oil of lavender. 

In order to satisfy the above requirements, it is Important that the solvent 
should be thoroughly rectified and free from moisture, otherwise it may cause 
precipitation when added to the varnish. Alcohol, which is a common con- 
stituent of shellac varnishes, is not to be recommended owing to its high solvent 
power and the consequent danger of damaging the paint. 


a) Balsams or resms. — Examples: Copaiba balsam, Canada balsam, Venice 
turpentine. 

b) Soft resins, — Examples: Mastic, dammar, sandarac. 

c) Hard resins, — Examples: Copal, amber. ^ 

a) The balsams are unsuitable for picture varnishes. 

b) Varnishes made from soft resins are prepared by dissolving the latter 
without the aid of heat in a suitable solvent such as turpentine. 

To prepare a mastic varnish, for example, the lightest coloured fragments 
of the dried resin are selected; these are placed in a small net bag and immersed 
in a wide-mouthed jar containing doubly rectified turpentine which must be 
free from moisture. The jar may be closed with a waxed cork stopper. The 
resin gradually dissolves, forming a clear solution which can be decanted after 

112 


Resins and Waxes. 

105. — Resins are found in their natural state in certain vegetable tissues from 
which they are extracted either by heating or by the action of solvents. They 
are divided into three classes, according to their solubility, and are called res- 
pectively : balsams, soft resins and hard resins, the last-named sometimes occur- 
ring in a fossilised state. 



a few weeks. The varnish is then ready for use. The actual strength of^ this 
solution is immaterial, provided it, is thin and as clear as water., 

c) The hard resins are Insoluble unless previously melted. Copal, for 
example, is made into oil varnish by melting it at a high temperature; the oil is 
then incorporated and, as soon as the mixture has cooled, the diluent is added 
in sufficient quantity to give the required consistence. Copal varnish cannot 
be prepared satisfactorily by the amateur. 

Beeswax and paraffin wax are very stable substances, with optical qualities 
which distinguish them from the resins. 


General Types of Vamislies, 

106 . — a) Oil varnish, artist’s copal varnish. 

b) Spirit (shellac) varnish, artist’s mastic varnish. 

c) Wax dissolved in turpentine. 

The presence of drying-oil in the protective film confers greater mechanical 
strength than is obtainable with spirit or turpentine varnishes, but at a slight 
sacrifice of colour (yellowing). The film darkens more readily than that of 
spirit or turpentine varnishes and eventually becomes quite insoluble. 

The film given by a turpentine varnish consists solely of resin; it is transparent 
and highly refractive and has the great advantage of not becoming insoluble 
with time, so that at any later date it may be easily removed without damage to 
the paint layer beneath. Soft resins, on the other hand, are brittle and do not 
confer the same mechanical protection as those containing oil, but they go yellow 
with age more slowly. 

In recent years, the use of waxes as constituents of picture varnish has become 
more and more general. 

It is always preferable to use the wax dissolved in turpentine and to apply 
the solution over a dried film of resin varnish, rather than to attempt to make a 
mat varnish by incorporating the wax in the varnish formula. By this double 
procedure, the virtues of both layers are unimpaired, whereas the mixed varnish 
is always of doubtful protective value. Wax should be applied in the thinnest 
possible film, and if desired it may be polished a few days later with a silk hand- 
kerchief, so that the surface will not be sticky and retain dust. The only excep- 
tion to this generalisation regarding mixed varnishes is the addition of a little .oil 
to mastic spirit varnish, as is commonly done to counteract the brittleness of 
the film. Given normal conditions, mastic varnish affords adequate pro- 


THE CONSERVATIO N OF PAINTINGS 


tection to the paint-layer for some 30 to 50 years, before it becomes yellow and 
disfiguring and ceases to afford protection. 

Wax, as has been stated, lasts remarkably well and, of all surface films, seems 
to afford most protection against the disintegrating influences of moisture and 
of the noxious gaseous impurities in the atmosphere of towns. 

See also the sections describing the various methods of varnishing (121-130). 


114 


B. - MALADIES AND TREATMENT OF YARNISHES 


SinHng in and wearing of£ 

187« ■ — ■ It frequently happens that a thin layer of varnish no longer fulfils its 
functions because, during the process of drying, the solution has sunk into 
areas of the painting that were too dry or too rough. This is the phenomenon 
generally called ‘‘sinking in”. 

When it occurs, the picture looks as if it had not been varnished; it assumes 
an unsightly and dull aspect, and the dark portions necessarily turn several 
degrees lighter. 

In many cases, it is impossible to distinguish between sinking in and the 
wearing off of the varnish due to abrasion, etc. 

As a rule, neither of these two defects can be remedied without applying 
a new, and perhaps a thicker coating of varnish. (See D.— Methods of 
Varnishing). 

Blooming. — Mould. 

m — A very widespread and disfiguring phenomenon is the so-called bloom- 
ing. It takes the form of a whitish opalescent haze on the surface of the var- 
nish, the darker areas of which appear bluish. One of the causes is dampness 
during or after the application of the varnish. Very often, it grows worse and 
penetrates more deeply into the varnish layer, sometimes completely changing 
the visibility of the painting. 

Treatment — A varnish prepared and applied under good conditions (see D) 
and kept in a constant temperature is less liable to bloom, but the blooming 
cannot always be avoided because it is sometimes due to physical or even 
chemical influences that are difficult to determine. 

In mild cases, polishing with some soft material, such as fine wool, silk 
or cotton-wool, will remove the blooming, but it generally reappears after a 
time. ■ ,, ,, 

A more lasting effect is obtained by wiping the surface of the varnish with 
a swab of cotton-wool wrapped in a piece of very soft chamois and soaked in 
turpentine containing about 20% of mastic varnish and 2% of castor oil It 


t 



115 


THE .C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 


is difficult to apply this treatment without leaving streaks, and the surface 
will remain sticky for some time. A painting so treated should be protected 
against dust and other atmospheric. impurities and kept in a room of constant 
temperature. 

If the blooming continues to penetrate, all the strata attacked can be removed 
by one of the dry removal methods (see § 1 27), after which a new varnish m,ust 
be applied. 

Another kind of malady due to dampness but of a more visible character 
is known as mould, a growth which covers the painting with a light white 
film. 

Mould may be merely superficial and can be removed by the same treat- 
ments as those indicated for the removal of bloom. 

Disintegration. 

109. — A general disintegration of the varnish, manifested by an unsightly 
grey aspect and an optical change in the colours, sometimes takes place without 
previous blooming and may be due to several causes. The treatment to be 
applied in such cases is given below. 

Crackle. 

110 * — One form of disintegration is known as crackling. This may be 
either identical with the crackling of the paint-layer, or occur independently 
of it and appear in the varnish alone. 

In mild cases, it is not always necessary to adopt any measures, but if they 
become too serious or if the varnish layer deteriorates so badly that it no 
longer affords sufficient protection, the continuity of the varnish must be 
re-established. 

As a general rule, it is better to remove completely a varnish that has disintegrated 
than to attempt to reconstitute it 

However, when a restorer is not available or when a cleaning substance 
offering every possible guarantee of safety is not at hand, or when, as is 
very rarely the case, an old original varnish seems to be present, the re^ener- 
ation method (see § 112) may be adopted, but its effect does not seem to be 
lasting., " 


116 



14 , CLEANING A PAINTING WITH A SMALL SWAB OF COTTON-WOOL WOUND ROUND A STICK, 



T H E C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 


: In the majority of cases, a new varnish layer applied on top of an old one that 
has disintegrated in some way will very soon deteriorate as well. 


Piilvemlence^ 

111, — The last stage of disintegration is the pulverulence or ‘‘chalking” 
of the varnish. Needless to say, this cannot be remedied and nothing remains 
but to remove what is left of the varnish layer (see C. — Removal of varnish). 

Regeneration. 

112. — In the XIXth century. Professor Pettenkofer Invented the following 
method of regenerating varnishes and disintegrated pigments : 

The bottom of an air^-tight box of exactly the same size as the picture is lined 
with thick felt; this is evenly sprayed with alcohol. The picture is laid face 
downwards on the box, like a lid, so that it rests only on the edges of the box. 
The sides of the box should be about 2 inches high. 

A preliminary test should be carried out on a small portion of the picture as 
follows: A round hollow lid (about 5 mm. deep and 1 cm. in diameter) lined 
with felt charged with alcohol is placed over a disintegrated area on the 
edge of the picture and the result checked at Intervals of not more than 10 or 
15 minutes. 

Sometimes, the varnish will not react at all, or too little, owing perhaps to 
the presence of an ingredient such as wax; in such cases, total regeneration 
should not be attempted. 

Generally, however, the circular area will become shiny and transparent, 
frequently after three or four minutes. 

This test will serve as an indication of how long the regeneration will take; 
it also indicates the moment when the operation may be regarded as accom- 
plished: e.g. when the shiny spot left by the lid is no longer distinguishable from 
the rest of the surface. 

This method, should, of course, be employed only by very experienced res- 
torers, and even then with scrupulous care, because some paintings (those con- 
taining resin in their binding medium, for example) react very quickly to this 
treatment and would easily be destroyed if exposed for too long to the action 
of alcohol vapour. 

Copaiba balsam which, according to Professor Pettenkofer might be used 


118 







» *. 

-. <?-w j; ■ 


15 . DETAIL OF A COROT, SHOWING IN THE UNCLEANED PORTION OF THE SKY A CLOUD EFFECT 
NOT INTENDED BY THE ARTIST AND DUE TO THE ACCUMULATION F DIRTY VARNISH IN THE 
FURROWS LEFT BY BRUSH STROKES. 






T H E C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 

before the ' regeneration, is no longer used, because of .its - instability; it is, in 
fact, quite unnecessary. ■ 

The whole process should, of course, be carried out in a dry and warm room 
entirely free from' draught. 

As a rule, as soon as the regenerated varnish has thoroughly dried and hard- 
ened again, a new layer of varnish should be applied. 






^'i4‘- 


liiiiii 


^Bil 


16 . DETAIL OF A DUTCH STILL LIFE. CRACKLES ACCENTUATED BY THE ACCUMULATION OF 
DUST, SOOT, ETC. IN THE LIGHTER SQUARE THE DIRT, BUT NOT THE VARNISH, HAS BEEN REMO- 
VED; IN THE WHITE PATCH, THE DARKENED VARNISH HAS ALSO BEEN REMOVED. (SCALE GRA- 
DUATED IN INCHES.) 




Ce - REMOVAL OF VAINISH 


Definition^ 

113* — The removal of varnish (French: devernissage; German: Firnissab-' 
nahme) is, In English, generally referred to as cleaning — the literal translation 
of nettoyage in French, and of Puizen in German. To avoid misunderstanding, 
when it is simply a question of removing the dirt which covers' the varnish, one 
should use the terms surface-'cleaning^ wiping or washing (German: oberflaecMiche 
Reinigung) as opposed to cleanings etc. 

On the other hand, the current English term for removal of varnish and re- 
touching, in short everything that does not belong to the original, h stripping 
(French; depouiUemeni; German; VoUstandige Reinigmg or Freilegung des Ori^ 
ginals). 

Principles* . 

114. — The hygienic reasons for the removal of varnish have been dealt with 
in a previous chapter, and the moral, aesthetic and scientific points of view in the 
foreword when referring to the processes of restoration. We may summarise 
as follows: 

Varnish should be removed unless more serious reasons prevail: 

1) When it is in a bad condition; 

2) When its colour disfigures the original Intended colour scheme of the 
painting; in other words, when the optical effect of the paint is altered by the 
varnish; 

3) When the restoration of the paint-layer requires it. 

As already stated, one rarely finds an original varnish on an old picture. In 
the great majority of cases, old pictures are covered with a varnish that has dark- 
ened with time and often deliberately tinted either to veil unsuccessful re- 
touchings or to give to the picture that ^‘golden glow” so much admired during 
the XIXth century. 

But whenever there is reason to assume that the varnish was applied in the 
master s studio, and if this varnish is in good condition, this should, of course, 
be left, and everything should be attempted to reconstitute it if it has suffered 
from one of the minor Impairments mentioned above. 


122 


17 . EXAMPLE OF CLEANING. THE DARKENED VARNISH HAS BEEN REMOVED PROM THE 

light patches on the man’s face and the dog’s head, and also from the background 

ON THE RIGHT, THE DARK BORDER ROUND THE TWO PATCHES IN THE UPPER PART OF THE PIC- 
TURE SHOW HOW THE CLEANING SOLVENT HAS REVIVED THE VARNISH BY RESTORING ITS 
DEPTH, WHEREAS IN THE UNCLEANED PORTIONS IT IS MAT AND MAKES THE DARK AREAS 

APPEAR LIGHTER. 




H' E; ■ € ,0^ N S 'E R' V A T I 0 N 


OF PAIN T I N G S. 


Preliminary examination* 

115* — Tlie removal of the varnish should never be started until every loose 
particle of the painting is safely fixed and until the painting has been carefully 
examined and. all the data recorded (see Chapters II and XIII).. 

. Ultra-violet rays are particularly useful for the examination of varnishes and 
especially as a means of control during the process of cleaning. Of course, 
one should never venture to remove all the varnish in ultra-violet light only* 
The .strongest daylight, sunlight if possible, or very powerful artificial light 
must be used (750 W minimum).. 

Every possible precaution must be taken in this most delicate of all procedures 
of restoration, including the presence of a witness (the owner of the picture, if 
this can be arranged). It should here be stressed, however, that no layman, 
and even few specialists, would be in a position to interpret correctly what 
happens during the process of cleaning. Only the man actually engaged in this 
work is able to sense how far he is penetrating towards the original paint-layer, 
for not only the eye, but also the touch, and even the ear, play a part in the 
control of the progress made. The experienced cleaner feels when he is passing 
from a soft and sticky coating of varnish or retouching to a harder and rougher 
original layer. 

Half-way Cleaning. 

116. - In view of the great danger of over-cleaning, it is often suggested that, 
in cases where it is necessary to disturb the varnish, only the upper portion of 
it should be removed, leaving the remainder before getting dangerously near 
the original paint. This sounds a simple and sensible suggestion, but it can 
very rarely be followed in actual practice; it is possible only when an extremely 
thick coating is present on a very smooth picture, and then only when the 
varnish reacts uniformly to the cleaning all over the surface. 

In the majority of cases, many parts of the picture would remain darker than 
others and this would often result in a serious interference with the balance of 
the painting. Art galleries are full of pictures which show that some cleaner 
has indulged in this kind of negative painting”: portraits with brilliant, clean 
faces, yellow hands, brown linen, etc. 

Many paintings have a rough texture due to the canvas grain or the brush- 
work, and it is obvious that, in the process of cleaning, the salient ridges of the 
surface will often become quite clean and bright while the hollows will remain 


124 





18 . CRUCIFIXION, XIIITH CENTURY, ARTIST UNKNOWN (S. DOMENICO MAGGIORE, NAPLES); 
PHOTOGRAPHED IN THE EARLY STAGE OF CLEANING. 



T.H E ' .-C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 'N . 0 F PAINTINGS 


dark or become even darker through dirt being rubbed into them. The dis- 
figurements caused in this way are often quite serious and sometimes even 
interfere with the presentation of the subject; for instance, a young face may 
become old and wrinkled; a clear sky may become heavy and cloudy, etc. (see 

Fig. 15). . _ 

Some people contend that an accumulation of dark varnish gives interesting 
emphasis to the original brush-work of the' master, but this emphasis is so 
casual that it destroys more of the original effect than it accentuates. The kind 
of basket-work texture to be seen in most Rembrandts nowadays was certainly 
far from the master’s intention. 

We know of many Rembrandts, Renoirs and so on, which have thus been 
changed by half-way cleaning, where the high lights now form dark spots 
because the dark varnish accumulated in the roughness of their brush strokes 
has not been removed. 

It goes without saying that particular skill and patience is necessary to clean 
these sometimes very narrow furrows and recesses. 

From the technical point of view, complete varnish removal is occasionally 
more dangerous than a half-way treatment, but from the artistic and scientific 
standpoint, an incomplete cleaning is nearly always more dangerous. (For 
the dangers of cleaning, see Chapter XIII, “Removal of Repaint”). 

The essential points of the procedure of varnish removal are dealt with in the 
sections on the removal of re-touchings (Chapter XIII). 

The much-talked-of so-called dry removal of varnish, a method which consists 
in starting with a grain of resin and rubbing off the varnish with the tip of the 
finger, is very rarely useful (see ‘ ‘ sinkIng-in” of the varnish-layer). On per- 
fectly smooth panels painted in pure oil or in tempera, this method may give 
good results, but In these cases a ‘ ‘ liquid ’ ’ cleaning would be just as safe. Where 
it would be dangerous to use a solvent, for example on a paint containing resin, 
the dry cleaning process would be still more harmful, for the paint would come 
off with the varnish, the pulverised varnish making it impossible to see what is 
taking place. 

CleaBmg Solvents* 

117* — Cleaning liquids usually consist of a mild ingredient, which acts as a 
restrainer, and the actual solvent, which is stronger. The most common mix- 
ture is made up of essence of rectified turpentine, as restrainer, and alcohol. 


126 



19 . detait; of a renoir. accumulation of dark, varnish in the hollows around the 

IMPASTATION. THE LATTER WAS DEPRESSED IN THE COURSE OP A PREVIOUS RE-LINING. THE 
PHOTOGRAPH, TAKEN BEFORE THE DARK VARNISH HAD BEEN COMPLETELY REMOVED, SHOWS 
THE EFFECT OF HALF-WAY CLEANING: ACCUMULATION OF DIRTY VARNISH IN THE FURROWS 
LEFT BY THE BRUSH IN THE IMPASTATION- 


as the strong solvent. The turpentine is now advantageously replaced by petrol 
(highly rectified spirit of paraffin, boiling point about 160^ C.). Pure ethyl 
alcohol is preferable to other forms of alcohol because it mixes better with tur- 
pentine or paraffin. We give here a short list of the chief cleaning substances, 
beginning with the weakest : 

I) Petrol or benzine; boiling point 40 to 60® C. (not to be confused 
benzene or benzol). This does not remove most of the varnishes, but leaves 
them a little duller; sometimes useful for removing surface dirt and grease 
before revarnishing; contrary to common belief, it is a weaker solvent than 2 
and 3, perhaps on account of its rapid evaporation. 



THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


fresh varnishes and balsams, unless applied by a long-acting process in the form 

of a wax paste or on soaked blotting-paper. 

3) Turpentine. Almost identical in action to 2. 

Tbe following substances cannot, in many cases, be used alone without dan- 
5 ,ger but are very useful in combination with 1, 2 or 3, or for special 
cases : 

4) Xylol. Boiling point 130-135^ C. 

5) Benzol. Boiling point 1 20- 1 60® C. Dangerous for most pictures less than 
100 years old, but safe for many older' paintings. Though weaker in action 
than alcohol, benzol intensifies considerably the solvent power of alcohol when 
added to it. 

6) Acetone. Boiling point 55-65*^ C. Powerful, but indispensable, especially 
when attenuated by some restrainer for dissolving certain hard resin- and oil- 
varnishes. 

7) Ethyl-alcohol or methyl -alcohol, Bolling point about 78® C. Some 
technical books recommend alcohol alone as a solvent for removing varnish 
in general, but it is a strong solvent and can be used with safety without dilution 
only on certain types of early paintings. 

Acetone and alcohol are similar in solvent strength but their action varies 
according to the different types of varnish. 

There are a great number of solvents to choose from and many of them are 
extremely useful for special cases. 

Proportions. 

118. — The action of a solvent depends very largely, of course, on: 
the pressure and rubbing action used; 

the softness and absorbing power of the material employed (cotton-wool or 
brush); 

the duration of the action (speed of evaporation of the strong ingredient); 

. ' temperature. 

The stronger Ingredient should always be the one that evaporates first. 
Experiments with all sorts of complicated mixtures are, of course, possible, 
according to the type of painting to be treated. 


128 


T H E CO N S E R V A T I 0 N 


Trial Solution* 


PAINT! N G S 


119 * — In principle, a trial cleaning should be started with a mixture not 
stronger than: 

1 part of alcohol to 20 parts of turpentine. 

Margin of Safety. 

120. — A fundamental rule is to use a mixture that will be just strong enough 
to remove the varnish. In most cases, there will, of course, be a wide margin 
between the mixture that will just do this and one that would attack the original 
paint. With regard to museums, to reassure persons who may fear the danger 
of cleaning in a given case, it is advisable to fix the margin of safety by carrying 
out a test on the edge of the painting to determine how strong a solution the 
paint will stand, and to note this in the record. This test can be made on the 
minute trial area without removing any appreciable amount of paint; as soon as 
the tiny cleaning swab shows the slightest trace of colour, the test is at an end, 
and it must be stressed that original paint on an old painting (more than 1 00 years 
old) never comes off quickly but only after insistent rubbing, if reasonably ade- 
quate solvents are used. In the majority of cases, the margin of safety is much 
wider than is usually assumed; for instance, where a solution of 1 part alcohol 
to 10 parts turpentine will suffice to remove the varnish slowly, a mixture of 
1 to 1 would still not be dangerous for the original if properly applied. We 
would again emphasise that even a harmless agent carelessly applied can, under 
certain circumstances, do more damage than a more violent one in the hands of 
a skilful and scrupulously careful restorer; for example, solvents slightly stronger 
than is really necessary, quickly and skilfully used, will often be safer than a 
weaker one requiring too prolonged rubbing. 


Ill 


Pill 










I 


iiii® 

illii 




■$ 





OO rjFTATI OF A FILIPPINO LIPPI: THE GOLDEN CALF ”, NATIONAL GALLERV. DETERItV 

RATION NECESSITATING CLEANING: VERY DARK AND SERIOUSLY CRACKLED VARNISH, GIVING 
THE IMPRE^foN HAS CRACKLED* WHEN THE VARNISH WAS REMOVED THE 

THE TO BE IN A PERFECT STATE OF PRESERVATION. 












T H B M 
> w H 

ws 

S ^ S fa 

O BO S M 





THE SAME PICTURE, PHOTOGRAPHED DURING THE PROCESS OF CLEANING AND 
ED LIGHT, REVEALING SURFACE IRREGULARITIES, DEEP CRACKLES IN THE THICK 
VARNISH, FISSURES, HEAVY RETOUCHINGS WITH UNEVEN SURAFCE. 



D, — METHODS OF ¥ARNISHING 

General Observations and Precautions. See also § 46. 

121. — Different types of paintings require different varnishes. The earlier 
pictures executed in size or tempera paint should have a dull finish; before 
applying the varnish, it must be ascertained whether it will soak into the paint 
and thus give more translucency and shine than were probably originally Intended. 
If so, a thin coating of clear gelatine (about 7%) or gum Arabic should be 
applied, and when this is quite dry the wax paste can be applied directly. If 
a little more shine is wanted, a thin layer of dammar varnish should first be 
applied, followed by a wax dulling. 

Generally speaking, later pictures from the Renaissance onwards can stand a 
more glossy varnish. 

Paintings of the Impressionist school are, as a rule, much too brilliantly 
varnished. They should be rubbed thinly with a layer of dammar varnish 
(after cleaning) and then dulled with a coating of wax. (See below : E. - Dulling 
of varnish.) 

As already mentioned, paintings should never be varnished until the surface 
has been cleaned; It Is essential that no dust or any kind of greasiness should 
remain.* Petrol (benzine) with a high boiling point is often useful for this 
purpose. 

If an old varnish is present, in sufficiently good condition to be preserved 
or not to be removed for some reason, but needing another coat of new varnish, 
one must always ascertain, by operating on a small area, whether the new varnish 
takes well on the old one and whether it looks well after drying; frequently, 
the new varnish will appear unsatisfactory over the old one and, finally, the 
latter will have to be removed and the new varnish then applied. 

The varnishing should be executed in a room free of dust, draughts and humi- 
dity; the temperature should be maintained at about 25® C. These conditions 
must be maintained until the varnish has dried perfectly on the picture. Some 
varnishes containing no oil will take two or three days to dry; others may take 
several weeks according to the proportion of oil. But the nature and texture 
of the surface of a picture have a great influence on the drying speed of the 
varnish. Over wax, for instance, the varnish will take far longer to dry than 
over a porous tempera surface. A wax coating should always be removed 
before applying a new varnish. The slight coat of wax resin still to be found on 



137 



substances possesses but some of the ideal properties formulated by the Com- 


(I) See Foreword. 


many paintings .treated with this mixture does not, however, prove disturbing 
as a ground for a new varnish. 

The picture, the varnish, the brushes and the sprayer must be of the same 
temperature, otherwise condensation water is formed and spoils the varnish 
(a frequent cause of blooming). 


Application of the Yarnish. 


122. — The varnish should be applied as thinly as possible, that is to say, just, 
enough to obtain the desired effect of refreshing the colour and just thick enough 
to provide the required protection. 'As all the varnishes which we are able to 
recommend for the time being darken slightly, the thinner the layer the more 
satisfactory will be the result. Moreover, a thick layer would submerge the 
original texture of the painting, which should always remain clearly apparent. 

The varnish is usually applied with a soft wide brush. But often a harder 
kind of brush will be more suitable for working the varnish into the surface in 
order to obtain a thinner and less shiny protective coating. This can, of course, 
only be done where no retouchings in wax or resin paint are present that would 
be dissolved with the rubbing. It is preferable to apply several thin coatings 
if necessary, rather than to apply one thick coating. The varnish thus spreads 
more evenly and broad areas are more easily covered; if necessary, isolated parts 
can be varnished without leaving any visible transition. 

If a spray-gun is used, the compressor should be fitted with a good system 
of dust, oil and water filtering, and a fan-nozzle with a screw for adjusting the 
outflow of varnish. 

Varnishes prepared with petrol instead of turpentine lend themselves better 
to spraying because they spread more readily on the surface. It is essential 
that the varnish should form a continuous coating and not isolated drops. 


Specific Properties of Varnishes. 


123. — Some of the experts of the Special Committee on the restoration of 
paintings and the application of varnishes at the Rome Conference ( 1 ) recommend- 
ed, for varnishes, the various resins dissolved in turpentine (with the addition 
of a small quantity of oil); others advocated the use of wax. Each of these 


T H E C Q N S E R V . A T ! 0 N OF PAINTINGS 

mittee. From the optical point of view, resin varnish is the best we know of 
at present, but its protective properties are insufficient. ^ ^ ^ 

On the other hand, wax affords the best protection but, in some cases, it is 
less satisfactory as a varnish with regard to the restoration of the transparency 

and luminosity of the colours of a painting. ^ 1 1 i r uii. j 

Most of the conditions laid down by the Rome Committee would be fultiiled 
if paintings were first treated with a resin varnish, which in turn would be pro- 
tected by a thin coating of wax. 

Resin (preferably dammar resin) has only a slight tendency to turn 
and even this drawback can be reduced to a minimum, since it is possible to 
apply it in very thin layers and the effect is completed by the finishing coating 

of wax. . . 

The coating of resin prevents the accumulation of an excessive quantity ot 
wax in the cracks and hollows of the paint layer the cause of disturbing effects 

of opaqueness at these points. r • *1 

Furthermore, thanks to this previous application of resin, one is no longer 
tempted to resort to an unfortunate overloading of wax on the parts ot the 
picture which are too dull in order to restore their depth. ^ 

Compared with the advantages, the drawbacks of wax, used as a finishing 
layer, are few in number, namely: 

1) The touching of the wax film always leaves a mark, but this is easily 
obliterated by polishing (1). 

2) Before undertaking any revarnishing or regeneration, the wax must be 
removed; this is easily done with turpentine or benzine. 

3) In hot weather, the wax tends to become sticky and to retain dust; this 
can and must be checked by adding a small quantity of mastic (1). 

4) In cold (frosty) weather, the wax has a tendency to become mat owing 
to crystallisation. This may be remedied by polishing. 

Vamisli Formulas. 

124 — Resin: 1 part of dammar resin dissolved cold in 2 parts of turpentine; 
when dissolved add 3 parts of petrol, or directly 5 parts of French turpentine. 

(I) These drawbacks can be avoided by adding carnauba wax to the formula. 


139 


T HE CQNSERVATIO. N OF PAINTINGS 

To obtain greater elasticity and permanence, add not more than 5% of stand 
oil (I), or not more than 2% of castor oil. 

Leave the mixture to dry for several days, avoiding variations in temperature. 

PFax: Dissolve I part of white beeswax in 5 parts of turpentine, in a water- 
bath at 60^ C. 

This solution is applied cold, with a very soft brush and as thinly and evenly 
as possible. 

Allow about an hour for drying. 

Polish with a still softer brush (of the kind used for polishing silk hats). 

. If a more glossy surface is desired, it can be further polished with a very soft 
woollen cloth. 

As a general rule, only varnishes which have but a small tendency to darken 
— mastic or dammar — containing up to 5% of stand oil should be used; but 
where a slight yellowing would be of no importance and where more effective 
mechanical protection is necessary, one can apply a thin coating of good copal 
varnish over the film of mastic varnish when the latter has dried. It must 
never be applied directly to the paint-layer, for this varnish could never be 
removed without danger to the painting. 

Cl) Linseed oil, heated in a vacuum; thick, clear, syrupy, but not oxidised. 




140 



E. - DULLING OF ¥ARNISHES 


Aesthetic Principles^ 

125® — One of the chief objections generally uttered against recently^ cleaned 
pictures is that they look too ^^new and polished . It appears that it is not 
only the bright colours that people object to, but also the too new and shiny 

varnish. .... i r j 

Such objections are, to a certain extent, justified; in fact, every newly applied 
varnish, whether on cleaned or uncleaned pictures, should be dulled down In 
some way in order to reduce that disturbing new appearance and unnecessary 
reflection from the surface. Many paintings, for instance tempera pictures 
and a number of modern types of paintings, are not intended with a shiny finish 

at all and should be kept particularly dull. 

Of course, the smoother, that is to say the shinier a varnish, the more perfect 
is its resistance to atmospheric influences and also the greater its transparency. 

The ideal, a perfectly smooth and transparent but still not shiny varnish, does 
not exist, for by reducing the glare one partly reduces the transparency. 

There is no dull varnish that would suit all types of pictures equally, but 
there are a number of different methods which can be chosen and adapted to 
each individual case. 

Dulling Ingredients in Liquid Varnish. 

126. — A quantity of commercial dull varnishes are available, some more or 
less successful, but on principle we cannot recommend any preparation the 
composition of which is unknown. Most of these compositions have the 
disadvantage of becoming brittle and very susceptible to scratching; moreover, 

they are difficult to apply evenly. • i i 

The most frequent and probably the best dulling ingredient is beeswax; the 
addition of a very small quantity to a varnish is sufficient to obtain a consider- 
able degree of dulling. It is almost impossible to apply this kind of varnish 
without leaving any marks of the brush and the only satisfactory way is to 
spray it on by means of a spray-gun. (See the section above on the application 

of varnishes.) Another disadvantage is its slow drying quality. 

Another possible ingredient is aluminium hydroxide or some similar neutra 




141 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


transparent substance. . This- would, of course, be unsuitable for very dark 
and smooth paintings. . 

Deglazing of dry ¥ariiisli layer. 

127. — The simplest way of obtaining a slight dulling of a varnish is to let 
the layer dry thoroughly and then rub it with very soft cotton-wool. Another 
method especially suitable for paintings with a rough surface texture is to apply 
on top of the dry varnish layer another very thin layer, rubbing it in with a 
hard almost dry brush until the varnish gets sticky; the rubbing should be 
continued until the varnish is quite dry. Some skill is necessary to obtain an 
even finish in this way. 

Another method consists in removing part of the dry varnish layer by means 
of different polishing or filing materials. The finest grain would probably 
be obtained by using polishing ‘‘rouge”, such as is used for cleaning silverware, 
and subsequently polishing with soft cotton-wool. The success of the ope- 
ration will, of course, depend very largely on the quality of the varnish itself. 
A stronger degree of dulling will be obtained by the so-called dry varnish removal 
method, that is to say by starting with a roughly pulverised grain of mastic or 
any other hard resin and filing off with slight pressure and rubbing, so reducing 
the upper layer of the varnish to powder. The very dull finish obtained by 
this method would suit only a few types of very light tempera paintings. It can 
be polished a little more with cotton-wool. A very agreeable semi-mat surface 
results when the varnish rubbed down in this way is subsequently polished 
with a soft silk-hat brush slightly wetted with wax paste. 

Wax Diilling. 

128. — This final application of a coating of wax also seems to be the most 
recommendable method to adopt for the treatment of any kind of shiny varnish 
{provided that it has not previously been submitted to one of the dry methods 
described above). It gives an agreeable semi-mat finish and can be polished 
to an even and practically completely transparent shine by means of soft cotton- 
wool. ■: . . 

To obtain a harder surface, the paste should always contain a little mastic 
or some hard mineral wax. The disadvantage of this finish is that it is more 
liable to get marked — finger-prints, etc. — but these can always be removed by 
renewed polishing with cotton-wool Another drawback that should be men- 


142 


THE \C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N 


0 F P A I N T ! N G S 


tioned is that some varnishes will dry more slowly and unevenly when applied 
over such a wax finish. As a rule, however, when the varnish is sprayed on it 
will dry satisfactorily. In some cases, it will be safer first to remove the wax 
finish with a swab of cotton-wool soaked in turpentine and wrapped in a piece 
of chamois leather. These latter disadvantages can be avoided by incorporat- 
ing a little carnauba wax in the paste. ■ 

Dulling with the spray-gun. 

128a« — The surface of a varnished picture can also be deglazed by the use of 
the spray-gun. The effect obtained is pleasing to the eye and, in many cases, 
the method is a very practical one. The screw which regulates the flow of the 
varnish may be so adjusted that only a small proportion of varnish is ejected 
from the nozzle with the air, leaving a thin haze of minute drops on the surface 
of the painting. The size of these drops and consequently the degree of dulling 
can be regulated according to the thickness of the varnish and the pressure used 
for spraying. 

Sensitiveiiess of dulled varnishes. 

129. — It should be borne in mind that all these processes which leave a 
somewhat rough and granular surface render paintings more sensitive to atmos- 
pheric influences, humidity, etc. This observation does not, of course, apply 
to a wax finish, which gives the most perfect surface protection so far known 
for paintings. 

Wet method. 

130. — Wet methods of dulling the varnish layer must obviously not be 
employed for paintings susceptible to damp. They consist in the application 
of a first thick coating of copal varnish; before this is thoroughly dry, a thick 
and even wash of aluminium hydrate or some similar substance is then applied. 
This is left to dry and then washed off with water; the surface thus obtained 
resembles that of frosted glass. A similar effect may be obtained by painting 
butter-milk over the dry varnish and removing it after drying. We mention 
these last two methods more to warn curators against them than to recommend 
their adoption. 


143 



CHAPITRE XIII 


MALADIES AND TREATMENT OF THE PAINT LAYER 


General Principles and Aims of Restoration. 

131. The stability of the paint layer which lies between the ground and the 
varnish is influenced not only by its own physical and chemical composition, 
but also by changes in the adjacent layers. If the ground cracks, the paint 
layer, in time, suffers likewise; if the varnish deteriorates, the paint layer is no 
longer protected and is liable to suffer. Damage which is not obvious may 
often be dangerous. On the other hand, a painting looks as if it were almost 
beyond repair, when, in fact, only the varnish has deteriorated. 

To determine what is wrong with a picture and what can be done to restore 
it, some knowledge of the structure of the painting is required. It is not suffi- 
cient to adopt any sovereign method which would remove the disturbing 
symptoms without going to the root of the malady to be cured. For example, 
when a painting has become unsightly, dry and brittle, it may be greatly improv- 
ed in appearance (“nourished” or “revived”) by rubbing it with some oily 
or greasy substance and many different patent materials are advertised for this 
purpose in the trade. But the improvement is transitory and there is more 
than a likelihood that further damage will accrue. If oil is used, the quantity 
absorbed by a dried-out picture is such that it might penetrate into the ground 
and alter the intended optical effect, making the picture darker in tone. Mo- 
reover, a drying oil would cause intensive yellowing in time and, when dry, 
would be impossible to remove. Non-drying oils (paraffin, etc.) would attract 
dust to the surface and alter the aspect of any varnish applied to it. 

The object of this chapter, therefore, is to point out the danger of such inju- 
dicious methods of treatment and to endeavour to correlate various types of 
decay with their causes, and to outline methods of treatment which are of 
proven utility and efficacy. 

No person who is not thoroughly initiated to the manipulation of such delicate 
substances as those which compose a painting should attempt to treat a picture. 
Even such a simple operation as wiping off the dust on the surface may prove 
disastrous; very often, the paint is ready to drop off in certain places and these 


145 


10 


T H E C O N S E R V A T I O N OF PAINTINGS 


are liable to be torn off by the duster. None but an experienced eye is capable 
of foreseeing the danger in time. 

However unimportant a painting may seem to be, it should never be entrusted 
to an unexperienced person for treatment, for it may well happen that a picture 
which has for many years been regarded as possessing but little value may, 
after cleaning, turn out to be a valuable work, the slightest deterioration of 
which would be Irreparable. The following recommendations have therefore 
no other purpose than to give curators and owners of pictures, who are gener- 
ally laymen in the technique and restoration of paintings, just sufficient insight 
into the various methods that will enable them to appreciate and understand 
the work of the expert restorer. (Those who wish to go deeper into the matter 
are referred to the bibliography given in the appendix.) 

Restoration Documentation. 

132. — Considerable progress would be realised in the conservation of present- 
day paintings if the artists could be prevailed upon to attach to their pictures a 
record of the materials which they have used and the methods adopted for the 
execution and varnishing of their paintings. Buyers of modern pictures should 
ash for this information or, indeed, make it a condition of purchase. This 
documentation would help to raise the standard of technique and to, reduce the 
necessity of having to resort to treatment in the future. 

The Restorer’s Workshop. 

133. — The artist-restorer should have at his disposal a well-equipped work- 
shop, generously lighted by big windows and an uninterrupted ceiling-light; 
the equipment should, if possible, include an air-conditioning plant and the 
room should be protected against dust and draught, with facilities for raising 
the temperature to about 25° C. for varnishing. The wall-surfaces facing the 
easel, and the floor, should be painted in a dark tint, with a mat finish, to avoid 
the disturbing reflections thrown off by the picture under treatment. In one 
of the workshop walls there should be a window through which the rays of the 
sun can enter directly to facilitate the examination of dark pictures. With 
regard to the equipment and working tools properly so called, reference should 
be made to the chapter entitled Methods of InOestigation in which the principal 


146 









V in 


28 . ELECTRICAL APPARATUS FOR THE TREATMENT OF BLISTERS. 

THE FOREGROUND. 


NEEDLES AND SPATULAS IN 


IS® 





A. - COMPOSITION OF THE PAINT LAYER 


Definition. 

134. — The paint layer may be defined as the film lying between the varnish 
and the ground. In the majority of cases, this film is itself composed of several 
superimposed layers : that on which the sketch is executed, the under modelling, 
one or two layers in grey or “local colour”, and the final modelling. Each of 
these layers may, in turn, consist of several thin layers (only the modern “alia 

prima” paintings are executed directly in one single layer). 

Paint is composed of two ingredients: the pigment and the binding medium 
(vehicle). Pigments are pulverised coloured particles. Media are colourless 
viscous liquids possessing drying or hardening properties. Their function is 
to bind the coloured particles together and to make them adhere to the ground. 

The stability of the paint layer depends on that of its constituents, and indi- 
vidual pigments and pigments alike show considerable variation in permanence 
under various circumstances; furthermore, when vehicles and pigments are 
mixed to form the paint layer, this combination can, in turn, show different 

kinds of decay. . , , it i • 

The various painting methods, or “painting technique”, are generally classi- 
fied according to the nature of the binding medium used. 

We give below a brief survey of the different types of media used for easel 
paintings, more particularly from the point of view of their respective stability 
and the different forms of decay to which they are subject. The Table of 
Colours given at the end of this manual contains a list of the principal colours 
used in painting, with an indication of the periods at which they are known to 
have been employed, together with data concerning their stability when combin- 
ed with the various media. The present chapter concludes with a study of 
the paint layer as a whole, the mechanical forms of deterioration which are 
likely to occur, damage due to accident or improper treatment and, lastly, the 
different kinds of treatment that can be applied. 

I. — Media. 

Among the numerous materials which have been used in painting as binding 
media for the pigments, only a few can claim to be of any great permanence. 
Even that most widely used —linseed oil— is in no way stable from the strictly 





29 . RADIOGRAPH OF PART OF A XVITH CENTURY VENETIAN PAINTING; NOTE THE DIFFERENT 
SHADES OF COLOUR, BLACK HOLES AND WHITE AND GREY STOPPING, CORRESPONDING TO 

SUCCESSIVE RESTORATIONS. 





T H, E C Q N S E R V A T I. O'N OF PAINTING S 

scientific point of view; in practice, however, thousands of masterpieces executed 
with, this material have survived after many centuries and are still in an excellent 
state of preservation. It frequently happens, of course, that the mixture of 
medium and pigment is more stable than the^ ingredients considered separately. 

Aqiieoiis Media® 

13S* Media belonging to this class are soluble or become viscous in water; 
they dry rapidly owing to the evaporation of the water; they are insoluble in 
alcohol, '.volatile oils,- etc. All of them are favourable to the development of, 
mould in a warm, damp atmosphere. 

Gum Arabic, the specific medium for water-colour, always remaining soluble 
in water, and white of egg, insoluble in water after hardening, are both used 
chiefly for miniatures, gouache, etc., and rarely for easel paintings. 

Vegetable glues, such as starch, have been used from the times of antiquity 
to the present day. 

Animal glue (size) and casern are also used for miniatures, etc., but play a 
great part not only in the ground but also in the lower layers of old pictures 
(drawing in, under modelling, etc.); they were also used in a great number of 
early easel paintings of a special type, executed on canvas or wood entirely 
with glue paint, — a technique known from the earliest times. This medium 
loses Its adhesive power in a warm, damp atmosphere and then becomes soluble 
in water, hence the danger of applying water to pictures so executed. Disin- 
tegration caused by damp or mildew, etc. can, however, often be arrested by 
drying and by simultaneous disinfection, also by tanning, or hardening (treatment 
with formalin vapour). 

Size paints are generally referred to as ‘‘distemper”, and wrongly as “tem- 
pera . . 

Tempera Media. ' ' 

136. — The word tempera comes from the Latin TEMPERARE (to mix), but 
it is now used to designate a medium composed of a natural or artificial emulsion, 
that is a well malaxed colloid containing aqueous and oily constituents. 

The prototype of an emulsion is egg, and up to the XVIth century the white 
and the yolk, or the yolk alone, formed the predominant paint medium. From 
that date onwards, oil was more and more widely introduced, but egg media 


150 


contirmed to be used, probably until the XVI I Ith century. They were more 
commonly used for panel paintings, but occasionally also for suitably prepared 
canvas paintings. Nowadays, they are employed more for the under-painting 
than for the complete execution of easel pictures. 

Egg can be mixed with oils and resins and all sorts of combinations are pos- 
sible and may have been adopted in earlier times. 

Fig milk^ which is really an adhesive, may also be used as an emulsion. 
Most of the combinations and artificial emulsions, such as gum-oil and glue-oil 
did not come into current use untlf towards the end of the XIXth century. 

Emulsions can be diluted with water. They harden or dry by evaporation 
of the water, but also by a sort of hardening or gelation, and by oxidation. 

Generally, egg emulsions and some of the other combinations are no longer 
soluble in water once they have hardened. They naturally assume some of 
the properties of the Ingredients incorporated in the mixture. 

Egg has always been, and continues to be, the most lasting of the known media 
for easel paintings. Under normal conditions, it does not darken (like oil) and 
offers a better resistance to atmospheric influences and to most of the cleaning 
solvents. 

The reason why tempera paint has gradually been abandoned is probably 
that it is not so easy to handle as oil paint and does not lend itself so well to 
naturalistic representation. 

OilMedia. 

137. — Oil media are composed of the various drying oils, such as linseed 
oil, poppy oil, walnut oil, etc,, in their natural (purified) state or thickened by 
exposure to the sun or by boiling. These oils were known to the painters of 
antiquity but it is supposed that they were not generally used as media until 
the XVIth century. 

Oil paint gives a more shiny and more transparent effect than size or tempera 
paint. It dries or hardens by oxidation, much more slowly than paintings 
executed with aqueous media or with emulsions; drying is sometimes accele- 
rated when the oil is mixed with certain pigments. This explains the unequal 
cracking sometimes to be seen in the same picture. .Complete hardening may 
take several years, but, once hardened, oil paint is soluble only in a very strong 
solvent. It is remarkably elastic but tends to become brittle with age, if exposed 
to light and air. It can be diluted by the addition of volatile oils or essences, 
such as turpentine or copaiba balsam. 


151 


T H E ■ '€ 0 N S E R V A T i O 'N " O /F P A I N TING S 



All oils darken more or less, especially in poor light. This phenomenon is 
generally partly reversible, that is to say the paint will gradually resume its 
original tone if exposed to strong daylight. 

Some old paintings have darkened remarkably little; this may perhaps be 
explained by the fact that the artist used some special preparation, such as stand 
oil, which seems to darken considerably less than other oils. 

The bad state of preservation of so many oil paintings of the XIXth and XXth 
centuries is due^ partly to the inferior quality of the paint manufactured com- 
mercially (as compared with the paint prepared by hand under the eyes of the 
master in the old workshops), and partly, but in a larger measure, to the negli- 
gent manner in which it was handled and applied to the support. 

It was also in the XIXth century that pernicious drying ingredients were 
introduced, either in the manufacture of the paint or in the preparation of the 
solvents and varnishes that were added to keep the paint liquid and sufficiently 
workable for several days. These ingredients are conducive to blackening, 
cracking and wrinkling. 

Wrinkling, a phenomenon similar to the wrinkles formed at the finger-joints 
on the back of an outstretched hand, is to be found on many paintings by 
Watteau; it is largely due to an excess of oil in the paint. Very often, the 
wrinkling to be seen on earlier pictures indicates an over-painted area (Fig. 30). 

In the process of oxidation, oils develop acids, which, in many eases, have 
deteriorated the canvas through the lack of an intermediate protective layer of 
sizing (see the chapter on the Ground). 

With the exception of the yellowing caused by oil and referred to above, all 
these changes are nearly always irreversible. (See the section below on Crackle.) 


Resinous Media. 


138. — Resinous media, which are more or less the same as the resins used 
for varnishes, have rarely been employed for paint media unless combined with 
oil or wax. From the XVIIIth century onwards, they were often added to oil 
paint, especially for pictures of the English school. A large number of resi- 
nous media were known to early painters. 

From the point of view of their optical effect, they are similar to oil media, 
but become brittle much sooner and are more susceptible to atmospheric 
influences; they always remain soluble, even in weak solvents such as turpen- 
tine or petrol (See Cleaning, Chapter XII.) For this reason, many paintings 


THE C 0 N S E R V A T I ON 


F P A IN TINGS 


, executed with a medium that contains resin have suffered very seriously from 
over-'cleaning. 

On the other hand, when dry and crackled, these pictures lend themselves 
. better to regeneration (see the chapter on the Varnish Layer) than paintings 
executed with a pure oil medium. ' ■ 

The resins used in paintings are: 

a) - Hard resins, mostly only soluble in hot oils; they are all more or less dark 
in solution and probably darken still more in the picture. (See Chapter XII: 
Varnish, copal, amber, etc.) 

b) Soft resins : soluble in weak solvents such as turpentine; they darken 
much less than hard resins (mastic and dammar) and oils. 

c) Balsams: these are slow-drying or non-drying substances and are not to 
be recommended as paint ingredients; they were occasionally used in the XIXth 
century (larch turpentine, copaiba, Canada balsam). 

The modern artificial resins or cellulose media have so far been but little used 
and will not be described in detail here. 

I 'Wax Media/',;. 

139. — This category of media Includes: beeswax, paraffin or mineral waxes; 
when used as media they are liquefied by warming to about 50^ C. — encaustic 
(old Egyptian technique) — or combined with resins (in which case they are 
diluted with essential oils — wax paint, or converted into an emulsion by sapon- 
ification (addition of alkali in water). 

As regards their optical effect, these media come between the tempera media 
(emulsions) and the oil media. Unless they are polished, they give a mat 
surface ; they are not completely transparent. 

As proved by the state of preservation of the portraits painted on Egyptian 
mummy cases, these media are remarkably stable; they are inert, offer more 
resistance to moisture and other atmospheric influences (sulphur dioxide, etc.), 
are fairly elastic and do not darken. They are always easily soluble in weak 
solvents, such as benzine, turpentine, etc. They become brittle in severe cold, 
this may be remedied by careful warming and subsequent polishing. 

(See also : Retouching, Relining, Varnish.) 


153 




T.'H E. € O,. N S E R - V A T J, 0 N O F PA! N T I N G S 


14S« — Paintings execiiled with resin or wax media are subject to Mooming; 
This phenomeon, which is caused by atmospheric influences, takes the form of 
a whitish, opalescent haze that spreads over the surface and is especially visible 
on the darker areas of the painting (see also Chapter XII). It can be remedied 
by dry polishing, in gentle warmth, with cotton-wool, or, in the case of wax 
paint (which would have a tendency to become sticky), with a very soft silk- 
, hat brush. 

Optical Function of Media. 

141. — Although the groups of . media described above differ considerably 
in character, it is often impossible to ascertain, by mere inspection, which has 
been used in a picture (oil or tempera paint, for example). There are several 
reasons why it is impossible to identify them: 

a) The painting (especially in old masterpieces) is often built up of different 
layers executed with different media; e.g. size or tempera for the lower layers, 
oil for the upper layers. 

b) More or less complex blends of the different media may have been used, 
particularly emulsions combining the optical properties of oils and tempera; 
or, again, the artist may have used unknown preparations and incorporated 
them in the commercial tube colours adopted for modern paintings. 

c) Even in one and the same layer, different pigments may have been ground 
with different media, for some pigments are more stable when combined with 
certain media; for example, verdigris between two layers of varnish. 

J) The initial aspect of a paint is often altered by impregnation with, or the 
application of, an oily varnish. 

The permanence of a medium undoubtedly depends very largely on the 
appropriate choice of the raw material, on its treatment during the manufacture 
of the paint and on its judicious application during the execution of the pic- 
ture.' , . 

IL — Pigments 

142. — The striking brilliance of certain old masterpieces has given rise to 
the idea that brilliant pigments were available in the past but are no longer 


154 


T H E CONS E'R'V ATI 0 N . OF PA I N: T I N- G S 


available today. This is not the case; on the contrary, today we have a much 
wider range of pigments than ever before and some of them are even ' of greater 
permanence. Some of the pigments used by the old masters have since become 
obsolete because of their instability; on the other hand, there, are some which 
are no longer used but which are remarkably stable. Old paintings owe their 
brilliant appearance less to the actual materials used than to the conscientious 
manner in which they were prepared and applied and to the skilful exploitation 
of their optical properties (transparency, contrast effects, etc.). Furthermore, 
the brilliance of certain pigments is today attenuated by the excessive grinding 
to which they are subjected in modern mechanical processes of manufacture. 
In the XIXth century, several new colours were invented and all were too 
hastily adopted by painters. Several of them have since proved to be imper- 
manent. 

Today, pigments are subjected to severe scientific tests and selection before 
they reach the artist’s palette and, for this reason, a greater number of reliable 
colours is now available than at any time in the past, so that no painter need 
now be obliged to resort to pigments of doubtful stability. 

Stability of Pigments. 

143. — The range of pigments used in the different processes of painting 
from the earliest times is so extensive that it would be impossible to deal exhausti- 
vely with all of them here. The Table of Colours at the end of this manual 
gives details for the principal colours which, for the purposes of this study, are 
of special interest because of their stability under certain conditions, their 
reaction to cleaning, etc. 

Unfortunately, very few of the changes which take place in the paint layer on 
account of instability can be reversed. 

It Is often difficult to judge to what extent a pigment has bleached, darkened, 
or changed in colour. Information on this point may sometimes be gained when, 
for instance, part of the required colour has been protected from fading by the 
frame. Often also some high lights strike the onlooker as too chalky or discor- 
dant; this may be accounted for by the bleaching or fading of the light parts or 
glazes. Old masters very often underpainted coloured garments in grey (or 
some other tint) with white high lights. On the other hand, the contrasts^of 
light and shade have become emphasised with time; this may be due to the 
darkening of colours (browns, etc.) or to the fact that a dark priming or under- 


T.H E C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 


paint has pierced the upper layers (Ribera); this latter phenomenon may be 
caused by an increase in the translucency of pigments where oil paint is present, 
or by wearing or abrasion of the upper lighter layers. Instances of such showing 
through of the red bolus priming are common in the works of Goya and Tinto- 
retto. (See: Ground.) 



B. - CHANGES IN THE PAINT LAYEE 


L — Changes due to the structure of the paint layer 


Complex Structure of the Paint layer. 

144. — ■ In the majority of cases, the paint layer is built up of a series of inde- 
pendent layers: the drawing-in layer, one or two lower layers in grey or local 
colour” and the layer in which the final modelling is executed. Each of these 
layers may be composed of several thin superimposed layers. (Only modern 
‘‘alia prima” paintings are executed directly in a single layer.) Among the 
exceptions to this general rule to be found in the past, we may mention the wax 
paintings of the Egyptians, the works of Franz Hals, etc. 

Each of the principal layers mentioned above can be executed with a different 
medium: the preliminary sketch or drawing-in, with a little ink, for example; 
the first modelling (monochrome) with size; the lower layer with egg, or even 
all the lower layers with size or tempera, and the final layer with oil. 

Ageing. 

145. — As has already been pointed out, many of the changes which occur 
in the paint layer itself can be traced to imperfect technique. Most of them can 
be revealed by an analysis of the media and pigments (see Chapter II). But 
even the most judicious technique and the best conditions of exhibition or stor- 
age cannot preserve a painting from some kind of natural ageing. Beyond a 
certain point, natural ageing leads to deterioration and, finally, to maladies 
which cannot be entirely avoided, but which can be delayed or appreciably 
attenuated by certain treatments. 

A more thorough tuition in sound technique, based on a knowledge of the 
methods of the old masters, will in future help to avoid the decay which is so 
manifest in paintings of the late XIXth century. 

We have to distinguish between two main kinds of changes : those which 
take place in the process of drying or hardening, and those which occur when 
the paint is dry. 



157 


THE CONSERVATION OF PA I NT I N G S 



CracMe^ 


146 « — The most frequent impairment is cracking. The majority of oH 
pictures show lines or a network of finer or coarser cracks. Their structure^ 
pattern^ etc, are often characteristic of certain schools and periods. The 
possible causes are so numerous that they will perhaps never be exhaustively 
explained. Systematic investigations have been in progress for some time 
(see BiMiographg) and it is desirable that an exchange of observations should 
be arranged on this essential point arising in connection with the deterioration 
of paintings (see Fig. 33). 

Cracking which occurs during the drying process has been described as earlg 
cracking. It is due chiefly to some imperfect technique and may occur inde- 
pendently in any of the layers enumerated above; it does not affect the ground 
and has no relation with the structure of the support, but often with the direc- 
tion of the brush-stroke. It appears in a variety of forms, in many cases even 
in the same picture, because different pigments (colours) may contain very 
different amounts of the same medium or even different media, with the result 
that these materials are subjected to different degrees of tension during the 
process of drying. 

Some colours (pigment plus medium) have themselves a tendency to crack, 
for example: the more transparent colours, particularly the lakes, lamp-black 
and ivory-black. 

The question of recent crackling will be dealt with in the section ‘‘Changes 
due to the support”, for, in the majority of cases, it is due to movements of 
the support. 


Treatment. 


147. — As a rule, crackle is to be regarded as a natural feature of old paintings, 
as it generally does not very much Impair their general appearance, no steps 
should be taken to “restore” them. 

Only in extreme cases, mostly due to the use of bitumen, especially in the 
XVIIIth and XIXth centuries, where they become too disturbing, may the 
cracks be filled in with paint. (See: Retouching, §§ 170-172.) 

Crackle can very seldom be reversed, and then only in mild cases, especially 
when resins are present in the medium, by a process of regeneration. (See § 112.) 

Early crackle, which has occurred during the drying process, will rarely 
grow worse with time, although the cracks caused by the movement of the 

158 



J' 

<Cf 


:eau. example of paint containing an excess of oil. the film 

HAS WRINKLED IN THE PROCESS OF DRYING. 


159 


THE CONSERVATION OF PA! NT I N G S 


■For the treatment of blistering, see' Chapter XIV, §§ 179-181, on the treat- 
ment of deteriorations' in the paint layer. 

Changes due to . the support and ground 

Mi® — It stands to reason that any movement or strain in the panel or canvas 
will tax the elasticity of the ground and of the paint layer, and give rise to various 
impairments, '(On this point, see Chapters XIV and XV, §§, 176-191, 230- 
232.) 

Cracks in the panel are communicated to the ground and paint, and this 
may flake off along the edge of the gaps. 

Repeated warping — or shrinking and expansion in the case of canvas — is 
a frequent cause of cleavage and blistering of the ground or of the paint; very 
often, this will occur in both ground and paint layer. 

Reflected light will reveal any unevenness of surface. In any case, the 
symptoms — the blisters — must be treated so that they may be made to adhere 
to the ground. 

Blisters. 

150. — Large blisters (loosening of the ground and paint layer from the support 
in the form of lumps or blisters) are the principal deterioration likely to occur 
in the paint layer and the most frequent cause for restoration. 

They occur just as commonly in panel pictures as on canvas, especially in 
Italian paintings executed on soft wood (poplar). When the ground or the 
paint is not sufficiently elastic to follow the inevitable movements of the wood 
or canvas, this suffices to produce blistering. 

The graver cases are generally due to deterioration of the wood, of the ground 
independently of the support, or of both (see the relevant chapters), or to an 
abnormal shrinkage of a panel, the latter becoming so narrow as to leave insuffi- 
cient room for the paint layer, which is compressed towards the centre. This 
may be caused by abnormal surrounding conditions (see Surroundings) or 
by bad quality or, in some cases, by disease in the wood (see Parasites), 

Preveutioii. 

See Chapter III. — Surroundings. 

160 



31 . METHOD OF FIXING A LOOSE PAINT LAYER. THE BLACK PATCH IS A WORM-HOLE. 


Treatment. (See also §§ 180 and 181.) 

151. — When a complete relining or transfer is unnecessary and a local treat- 
ment of the affected areas is sufficient (the symptoms being caused by acci- 
dental influences only), the following method is adopted: 

When a picture shows areas where the paint layer is loose, these must first 






THE, ,, CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


be secured by sticking transparent Japan paper : or adhesive ^ tape over them 
(see Relining). Wax, paste or rubber may be used as adhesives,— in general, 
any adhesive that can easily be removed by weak solvents which do not attack 
the varnish, e.g. benzine; care must be taken, however, not to use size, as this 
harde,ns to excess during the process of drying and is apt to detach the varnish 
or the loose parts of the paint layer. If size or gelatine be used, these substances 
must be well diluted and rendered more soluble by the addition of a small 
quantity of gb^cerine. 

A stronger adhesive should then be Introduced beneath the loose areas. In 
the case of a canvas support, this ' may ' often be done from behind, sometimes 
by pricking the canvas in the areas corresponding to the loose parts of the paint. 

When the affected areas have been covered 'with paper, etc., the raised por- 
tions should be pricked, preferably on the already open cracks, by means of a 
fine needle electrically heated, to a temperature sufficient to penetrate the 
paint layer slowly, without scorching or burning it. (A cold needle breaks the 
paint and makes too big holes. See Fig. 28). 

When the blisters have not been covered with paper, or when the cracks 
are sufficiently wide to permit of introductlng the adhesive liquid, no pricking 
is .needed. 

The needle should be inserted obliquely rather than perpendicularly, in 
order to facilitate the penetration of the adhesive. Two or three tiny perfor- 
ations will suffice, even for the treatment of a big blister, when the needle is 
nserted at the crest. (See §§ 197-207.) 


An emulsion of wax and Venetian turpentine, mixed with gelatine, may also 
be used. This mixture has the advantage of being more strongly adhesive 
and, provided that the emulsion is white, of modifying the refractive power of 
the ground less than a mixture of resin and wax. It can be thinned by adding 
spirits of paraffin oil. (See: Treatment of Wood,) These considerations are 
important for all pictures where the white reflecting ground plays a part. The 
relative proportion of the substances which go to make up the emulsion depends 
very largely on their individual properties and on the temperature; a trial should 
therefore be made before each application. 


162 





32 . VAN GOGH: “ THE SUBWAY THE WHITE ARROWS INDICATE THE PARTS WHERE PAR- 

TICLES OF PAINT HAVE BECOME DETACHED, LOOSENED PERHAPS IN THE COURSE OF CARELESS 
CLEANING. THE LOOSE PARTICLES MUST BE FIXED BY RE-LINING. HEAVY IMPASTATION NECES- 
SITATING A SPECIAL BED DURING THE RE-LINING OPERATION. DARK GREY BANDS ABOVE AND 
BELOW WHERE SUPERFICIAL DIRT HAS NOT BEEN REMOVED AND SHOWING A NOTABLE DISFI- 
GUREMENT, DUE SIMPLY TO DUST, ETC. 




THE C 0 N S E R V A TION OF PAINTINGS 


This emulsion is also very suitable for rellnlng, where a specially strong 
adhesion is needed (for energetic cleaning, for example). Glue without the 
addition of a plasticiser (resin, wax, etc.) is to be avoided. (See § 205.) 

Application. 

153 . — When the parts to be treated have been gently warmed, the adhesive 
is introduced, through the cracks or perforations, in a hot liquid state by means 
of a small electrically heated spatula, the heat being_ carefully regulated not to 
exceed 70° C. by a resistance according to the sensitivity of the paint. 

With gentle pressure and moderate heat, the adhesive will soak in and the 
loosened areas can then be pressed down and levelled with the same spatula 

slightly cooled. • -n i i 

if this operation is skilfully carried out, no fragment of paint will be lost, 
even if no paper or other protective covering has been applied. 

When the adhesive is dry, the protective covering is washed off. If neces- 
sary, the blister can again be levelled down with the heated spatula, pressure 
being brought to bear directly on the unprotected surface. 

Raising method. 

154 . — When there is a considerable hollow under the paint layer (worm- 

i holes in the wooden support, for example), the loose particles of paint can be 

raised by means of a strip of transparent adhesive tape, part of which reniains 
stuck to the firm part of the paint; the tape is thus manipulated like a hinge. 
The hollow can be filled with putty, etc., and the paint particles stuck back 

^ exactly in position in the way described above (Fig. 31). 

the case of a wood panel-painting and provided that the paint layer is in 
a good state of preservation, a disquieting hollow can be remedied by operating 
from the back. First of all, the paint layer should be secured by means of a 
strip of transparent adhesive tape covering slightly more than the area of the 
cavity. The panel is then screwed, face downwards, to a smooth, hard board; 
a square corresponding in size to that of the cavity is next cut out of the back 
; of the panel and pressure brought to bear on the ground and paint layer until 

; they are level with the remainder of the panel. When this stage of the operation 

is terminated, the space left between the ground and the panel is filled first 
with a liquid adhesive and then with mastic. 




THE C.ONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


When the ■ strong adhesive is thoroughly dry, the paint layer will adhere more 
firmly to the support and ground than to the adhesive tape, and this can be 
carefully raised and any portions of the tape which remain stuck to the picture 
may, be washed off. The type of tape used should have a rubber adhesive as 
this can be removed by a solvent (benzine) and does not attack the varnish. 

Precautioiis* 

155. — ■ It frequently happens that a particle of paint detaches itself from the 
ground, which, in turn, becomes separated from the support; if it is found that 
a particle of paint has stuck to the adhesive tape (which has not yet been com- 
pletely removed), this particle must be stuck down before the tape is completely 
withdrawn. 

Thin strips of glass may be stuck on to the tape to prevent crackling during 
the process of lifting. 

The adhesive power of the tape should be just sufficient to tear off any par- 
ticle of paint that does not stick firmly enough to the ground. 

Recurrent deterioration. 

158. — If, after such treatment, further blistering occurs, or if the blisters are 
caused by some chronic disease of the support or ground, more radical methods 
will have to be adopted. (See: Transfer, Re-^lining, etc., §§ 182-224.) 

Crackle, a form of deterioration which is regarded as a natural phenomenon, 
will generally not develop further in pictures more than about fifty years old, 
for it will then have attained its maximum. The pictures will therefore be 
affected only to an insignificant extent by atmospheric conditions, unless they 
are exposed to a radical change of climate. 

For exceptional cases due to the faulty adjustment of the framing of a panel 
or canvas stretcher, see the sections dealing with supports (§§ 229-250). 

Deterioration due to resin in the support. 

157, — In certain paintings executed on a thin ground, such as some Dutch 
XVIIth pictures, the resin in the grain of the wood often penetrates the ground 
and stains it, as well as part of the painting, a dark brown. Streaks then make 
their appearance through the paint. 


166 








* 




mm^ms 


34 . DETAIL OF A MEMLING: NORMAL CRACKLES TYPICAL OF XVTH CENTURY GERMAN PAINT- 
INGS PROBABLY DUE TO THE TRACTION EXERTED BY THE PANEL ON THE PRIMING AND 

PAINT LAYERS. 


T H E ,C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 


A similar brown stain that seems to come' from beneath is sometimes iotmd 
aroimd the crackles in thicker grounds. 

When these stains become too disturbing, they should be covered with a 
fairly ' dense coating of tempera paint. 

III. — Deterioration due to the varnish layer 

Chapter XII, Maladies and Treatment of the Varnish Layer ^ gave the necessary 
details concerning the function of varnishes, their composition, the deterioration 
to which they are subject and the treatments that can be applied. Certain' 
points dealt with in that chapter will be taken up again in the following section, 
in order to define the part played by the protective layers in the deterioration 
of the paint layer. 

Mechanical or aesthetic function of varnishes. 

158. — Generally speaking, few cases of real damage to the paint layer can be 
attributed to the varnish, although optical conditions — appearance of the paint 
layer — are largely dependent on this protective coating. Moreover, many 
cases of deterioration which seem to have spread to the paint layer are comple- 
tely localised in the varnish layer. 

On the other hand, a varnish applied to paint that has not thoroughly dried 
may cause deterioration — blooming and darkening, for example— because the 
necessary process of oxidation of oil paint is impeded by the film which prevents 
it from coming directly into contact with the air. 

It should also be pointed out that a varnish which has partly or completely 
disintegrated becomes permeable and its protective properties are thus reduced 
or destroyed; the paint layer is henceforth exposed to the pernicious action of the 
atmosphere. 

Further, yellowing — the most frequent form of deterioration that occurs in 
varnish — causes no material damage to the condition of a painting; it merely 
mars the effect intended by the artist. 

Some forms of mechanical deterioration may be attributed to the varnish: 
the latter shrinks in the process of drying, and, since it adheres to the paint layer 
beneath, it sometimes tears this layer if it is particularly fragile. This rarely 
occurs in old paintings. Only a picture executed with a resin medium and 
softened by regeneration, for example, will suffer from deterioration of this 


168 



DETAIL OF A TERBORCH. CRACKLES CHARACTERISTIC OF XVIITH CENTURY DUTCH PAINT- 
INGS, PROBABLY CAUSED BY THE NATURAL TRACTION OF THE CANVAS WITH AGE. 




THE CONSERVATION 0 F P A ! N T I N G S 


kind If® before it bas recovered its firrrmesSs a bard quick-drying varnish is 
applied immediately. 

In the case of recent paintings (and retouching executed with oil paint), this 
danger is by no means negligible. The contraction of the varnish as it dries 
may very easily tear the paint layer and cause serious crackling. Fakers take 
advantage of this phenomenon to produce artificial crackles in their paint- 
mgs. 

This danger can be very appreciably reduced by applying only a thin, coating 
of a varnish which is sufficiently elastic (ma.stic or dammar dissolved in' turpen- 
tine, to which a small quantity of stand oil has been added), in accordance with 
the recommendations set forth in Chapter XI L' 


IV. — Deterioration due, to acccidenta'l causes or previous interference 
Cases warraiitiEg restoration* 

159* — - The ' treatment of the forms of deterioration so far dealt with may be 
classed; under the heading: cometpation. measures. We shall now examine the 
cases where there is real loss (or obliteration) , of a painting and where the only 
remedy lies in measures of restoration properly so calledv,' 

The first reason which generally' urges one to resort: to measures of restora- 
tion is the discovery of some deterioration of this kind or some change in the 
varnish which affects the appearance of the picture* 

Preliminary Examination. 

16i. — To reduce disappointment to a minimum and to give the owner or 
curator, as well as the restorer, every possible guarantee, any work of value 
should be subjected to a very thorough examination (preferably in the presence 
of the owner or curator, or a witness) and all the observations photographically 
recorded, recourse being had to all the processes offered by modem technique. 
This inspection should precede restoration. The ideal method of recording 
the results of such an examination would be to take large stereoscopic photo- 
graphs in colour, completed by macrophotographs of the most important details. 
(See Fig, 25 and §§ 8-25.) 


170 



TdETAIL, approximately X 2 ENLARGEMENT); FORM OF CRACKLE 
IS» PROBABLY DUE TO THE TRACTION OPj THE PANEL ON THE PRI- 
PAINT COMPOSITION PECULIAR TO THE MASTER. 


.T H„E' G 0 ,N S E R V A T I O, N OF PAINT'INGS 


The f ucstion ©f cleamng. 

16L — Once al! the minor repairs have been carried out and the varnish 
regenerated, the question frequently arises whether it would not be advisable 
to remove the dark varnish which disfigures a picture, so that the painting may 
be seen' to its best advantage. 

Nobody but the restorer can decide whether such an improvement is compa- 
tible with the estimated amount of work involved; it will then be for the owner or 
curator to decide whether the expense incurred is in keeping with the value of' 
the picture. 

Since it is extremely rare to see an old picture which has not been restored 
in one way or another, it frequently happens that retouchings appear and may 
also be removed with the varnish; in the majority of cases, these retouchings 
will have to be done over again. 

However experienced a restorer may be, he will not always discover all the 
retouchings through an old semi-opaque, dark and crackled varnish, — not even 
by ultra-violet. rays. 

Lighting* 

162* — We wish to emphasise once again that strong light — sunlight, which 
is always the most favourable, or a powerful source of artificial lighting with 
“daylight” bulbs — will always prove to be more useful than strong magnifiers 
or a complicated apparatus. A good full-size photograph or a photograph 
taken with direct magnification of about X 3 diameters (indirect enlargements 
are never sufficiently clear) will often show all that one wishes to know about 
the condition of a painting. 

Either before or after the removal of the varnish, many old retouchings, exe- 
cuted with oil paint which has darkened with time, are visible to the unaided 
eye in the form of dark patches. In good light, a lens of about X 6 to 8 diameters 
will, in most cases, show whether the crackle in the original is covered or con- 
cealed by a superimposed layer, or whether it has been artificially produced in 
the repainted areas. Even the most skilfully executed artificial crackle will 
differ, in one way or another, from original crackle. One must, however, be 
very cautious before drawing conclusions; there may be paradoxical cases where 
artificial crackling is found in the original paint layer, or natural crackling in 
the parts repainted, because, in time, a natural crackle will often spread to the 
ayer above. (See Fig. 28). 


172 



^:my^ ■^^ 


■f.'" 



CONSERVATIO-N OF PAINTINGS 


Very often also, a difference in texture (of the paint layer) reveals the areas 
which have been clumsily or injudiciously treated; these areas are especially, 
conspicuous when examined under reflected or oblique lighting (see Chapter II, 
§§ 8-25: Methods of Imestigaiion applied to the Examination of Pictures). 

For magnifications of more than X 8 diameters, binocular magnifiers should 
be used so as to obtain a . stereoscopic view of the picture; special lighting such 
as is used for ■ microscopical examinations should be available, with a tinted 
filter — natural lighting. By this means, it is possible to see the differences in 
structure and, very often, with a magnification of from X 30 to 100 diameters, 
the different grains of the pigments in the original as well as In the parts repainted. 

Polarised light (see Chapter II, § 21) is very useful for examinations of this sort. 

Ultra-'Violet and infra^^red rays. — An examination or a photograph by 
ultra-violet or infra-red rays will, in many cases, show up retouchings, which 
will appear as dark (or light) clearly-outlined patches, unless the rays are stopped 
by certain oil varnishes or a varnish that has disintegrated. 

All these methods of examination will more or less clearly reveal the extent 
of the areas repainted, but will not show the real deterioration covered by these 
additions. 

X-Rays. — An x-ray photograph (radiograph) or a radioscopic examination 
will generally show that the actual gaps are of an infinitely smaller area than the 
retouchings; formerly, retouchings were not executed with that scrupulous care 
to be noted today, and very often they spread over a considerable portion of the 
original adjoining the deteriorated area. 

Here again, the utmost caution is necessary in drawing conclusions from a 
radiograph or radioscopic examination, for, very often, x-rays do not reveal the 
actual hole but the stopping, and — as in the case of certain retouchings — the 
mastic extends w^ell beyond the deteriorated area. 

It occasionally happens, therefore, that one discovers fairly large areas of the 
original paint in a good state of preservation, not only under the retouchings 
but also under the mastic. Very often, after having removed the overpaInt, 
a perfectly well preserved paint is found. The coating which sometimes extends 
over the entire picture was obviously added with the intention of ‘‘improving” 
its aspect as a whole. Even up to recent years, notable changes were frequently 
made in garments in accordance with current fashion or the prevailing ideas as 
to ' p.ropriety. 



174 


C ~ TREATMENT AND RESTORATION 


Trial Qeaning® 

163® — When there is no possibility of taking photographs or of resorting^to 
other methods of recording, either because such measures would not be justified 
by the value of the painting, or because of the expense involved, an approximate 
idea of the state of preservation of a picture can be obtained by carrying out, 
in the presence of the owner or curator, two or three trial cleanings on very 
small areas, in the parts where it is presumed that the original paint has been 
covered by additions. The cleaning is done with a small pointed stick wrapped 
in cotton-wool moistened with a solvent. 

The methods of removing varnish were described in Chapter XI L No var- 
nish should be removed until all loose particles of paint have been secured by 
local treatment or by re-lining. The wax adhesives described in the present 
chapter will perhaps not be strong enough. If it is expected that the cleaning 
will require the use of active solvents, more strongly adhesive emulsions must 
be used. 

Removal of Repaint. 

164. — Repaint and retouches recently executed with a resin medium will also 
disappear with the same more or less mild solvents that dissolve the varnish. 

In many cases, however, recent retouches, when executed with aqueous 
media — water-colour or tempera — will not yield even to the stronger varnish 
solvents. The same holds good when an aqueous isolating coating is laid on 
the retouches. They will, however, sometimes dissolve with cold or warm 
water; for this operation, the cotton-wool swab should never be soaked, but 
only just damp. 

Some tempera retouches and old oil retouches will only give way to stronger 
solvents. 

As a rule, retouches are softer than the older original paint and they can there- 
fore be dissolved without risk of damaging the older layer. Thus, the wide- 
spread opinion that cleaning is always dangerous for all types of pictures is for- 
tunately proved to be incorrect. It is perfectly true that cleaning is attended 
by certain risks, but only for a small category of paintings executed with media 
that remain easily soluble (e.g. certain pictures of the English School of the 


175 




T ,H E . CONSERVATION OF P A I N T I ,N G. S 


XVIIIth century), or for pictures in an exceptional condition — soft or brittle, 
or for those rare cases where an oil varnish is as hard as, or harder than, the paint 
beneath. But what will always constitute a danger for any kind of picture is 
the possibility of its falling into the hands of an inexperienced or inconsiderate 
restorer. . ■ 

■ Any , fresh mixture prepared for the purposes of cleaning should be most 
carefully' tested on the edge of unimportant parts of the painting to make quite 
sure that it is absolutely harmless. 

The solvent should be just strong enough to remove the overpaint slowly' 
with gentle rubbing. It may be taken that all the added paint has been removed 
when a new swab remains clean after continous rubbing on the same spot. The 
experienced cleaner will nearly always be able to distinguish between tinted 
varnish, original paint and added paint. When the retouching has been done 
only a short time after the completion of the original painting, however, the 
distinction is often difficult, not to say impossible, even with the aid of the 
various methods of technical investigation. In doubtful cases, the simplest 
way of avoiding any damage is to leave the suspected layer untouched. The 
same principle holds good for additions which cannot be removed without risk 
for the original. 

The cleaner should always be on his guard and constantly bear in mind that, 
very often, certain parts of the same picture are more soluble than others, for 
example : the dark browns and other black transparent colours, lakes, etc. 

When the suitable solvent for the picture under treatment has been found, 
the exact formula should be noted in the record. 

A warning is here necessary against the three following methods of softening 
varnishes and retouches : cleaning with a swab moistened with a strong, undi- 
luted solvent such as alcohol, and arresting or restraining its action by means 
of a second swab dipped in turpentine or some other mild solvent; the use of 
the regeneration box; and, lastly, the laying of blotting-paper soaked with alcohol 
or other strong solvent on the surface of the picture, and a final cleaning with 
a dry or damp swab or brush. None of these three methods permits of constant 
and complete control, for original paint, even that of very old and hard pictures, 
softens at the same time as the overpaint; this has been proved by tests. 

Only a restorer with years of experience as a painter and familiar with all the 
painting materials and the different ways of using them is, as a rule, able to deter- 
mine the most appropriate method of cleaning to adopt in difficult cases. 

Whenever an old and successful retouching is found, which does not cover 


178 


T H E C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N 


PAINT! N G'S 



0 F 


any portion of the original and which has not darkened, it should, as much as 
possible, be allowed to remain. 

Solvents* 

165* — Varnish solvents were described in detail in Chapter XIL We will here 
recall that benzol plus alcohol, for example, forms a strong solvent specially 
suitable for the removal of paint. Benzol alone is a weaker solvent than alcohol, 
but a combination of the two produces a stronger solvent, which can be weakened 
as desired by the addition of turpentine or rectified paraffin oil (petrol). It is 
sometimes more risky to clean the gilding than any other part of a painting; 
ethyl-trichloride is generally used for this work. (See §§ 173-175 below on 
Gold grounds and Gilding). 

There are today a large number of solvents available and they lend them- 
selves to all sorts of combinations. Many of them are injurious to the health 
of the person using them. 

Old and hardened retouches executed in oil paint, and even comparatively 
new tempera repaints, can, in many cases, be removed only by a solvent con- 
taining a small proportion of ammonia. Such a mixture, used preferably in 
the form of a soapy paste with wax, oil or balsam, would end by damaging the 
original paint if left too long on the surface or if it were incorrectly used; when 
applied by skilful hands, however, it will often give far better results than an 
absolutely safe process in the hands of a careless operator. 

Scraping. 

166* When the dissolving of a repaint is liable to damage the original paint, 
a mechanical process is adopted; this consists in removing the added layer by 
scraping or splitting, generally without previous softening. Specially shaped 
instruments are needed for this work and it is advisable to operate under a fairly 
strong magnification with a binocular magnifier (x8 to 15 diameters). This 
method is, in many cases, safer than the use of strong solvents and is frequently 
resorted to with great success. 

Each stage of the process may be controlled not only by magnifiers, but also 
by ultra-violets rays, which will prove useful in showing up areas on which 
varnish or retouchings remain. 


179 



ationof an old painting into a modern portrait with 
transformation was executed on a portion of the 
THE elder. condition OF THE PANEL BEFORE TRANSFER 





T H E C O N S E R V. A T i O N OF PAINTINGS 


OH Stoppings. 

167* ^ — When all the retouches have been removed, the holes and stoppings 
will be laid bare. Old putty which has become brittle should be carefully 
■removed; old stoppings in good state of preservation and showing no signs of 
crackie may be left, provided that they are as light as the original ground and 
cover , no portion of it. 

Photograpiiic Records. . 

168 *’ — Photographs should be taken of the different stages of the cleaning 
operations, but the most valuable record will be a photograph of the picture 
completely stripped; the most important portions of the picture should be pho- 
tographed full-size. When dealing with particularly delicate or interesting 
cases, it will be found useful to take a series of colour photographs or to carry 
out a few colorimetric tests before and after cleaning. 

Stopping. 

169. — The holes thus revealed in the paint (which sometimes reach as far as 
the support) should be carefully cleaned by scraping and filled with putty con- 
sisting of a filling material, such as chalk or plaster, bound with a medium (e.g. 
glue) and made plastic by the addition of small quantities of oil, soft resins, wax 
or egg-yolk The filling material should be more elastic for canvas pictures 
than for panel paintings. It should be tinted to match exactly the colour of 
the original ground, the principle of modern restoration being to follow as closely 
as possible the methods adopted for the execution of the original. 

RetoucMag.. . . 

170. — When a restorer wishes to imitate exactly the parts that are missing 
in the original, the only way of achieving this will be to imitate also the principal 
layers beneath. 

Before the putty has completely hardened, it should be levelled and smoothed 
by wiping, filing or scraping with appropriate instruments (cuttlefish bone, 
steel-wool, etc.). When dry, the filling material should be just a trifle lower 
then the surrounding level in order to allow for the paint to be applied. 


182 



42 , THE SAME PAINTING AFTER REMOVAL OF THE OVERPAINTS. 




THE - GONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


Imitation of Original Layers. 

17L — The priming colour is next applied to the putty, in exactly the same 
shade as the original, with size or tempera media. The drawing-in or under- 
modelling is then completed — when this is desired — in the manner of the ori- 
ginal also with an aqueous medium. On this, the underpaint is applied in 
tempera, in the colours of the original. These colours can be determined by 
examining, with a magnifier, the areas where the final layer of the original has 
been removed by scraping or splitting, leaving the lower layer bare. 

Already in this layer, not only the correct shading but also the exact degree 
of translucency is important for a successful restoration. These will, of course, 
be better matched by using the same pigments as those used for the original 

As a rule, the retouching should be left slightly lighter in tone; interference 
with the modelling of the master will thus be more easily avoided. 

If an exact match of the final glaze is wanted, wax resin colours must be used. 
(See: Bihliography.) 

The disadvantage of tempera is that it becomes so hard that it is often difficult 
to remove; this can be avoided by using a tempera rich in resin and wax. 

An intermediate varnish layer of dammar in turpentine under the tempera 
paint will make it possible to remove the latter more easily. Each coating 
should be thinly varnished with dammar before the next is applied. 

Tempera should always be used irrespective of the technique of the original, 
even if the original was executed in oils, because oil colour would darken and 
become more transparent with time, while a tempera layer, varnished and 
glazed, harmonises much better with the old, transparent (vitrified) oil paint 
than actual oil paint. The essential rule to be observed in retouching is never 
to go beyond the area of the missing portion by encroaching upon the old paint. 

Abrasions* 

172. — Retouching becomes difficult where no definite holes exist, but where, 
for instance, the upper modelling is partly effaced or worn off by abrasion. 
Here, the discretion and tact of the owner or curator and of the restorer play 
a decisive role, and there is always a danger of going too far. If, however, care 
is taken to keep the retouches always a shade lighter than the surrounding colour, 
interference with the original intention will often be avoided. 

To complete the final modelling that has been worn off, none but resin or 
wax colours, which can easily be removed, should be employed. 



There would be scarcely any objection, to the use of water-colours if these 
were not so difficult to handle; they are nevertheless quite suitable for restoring 
Italian primitives painted in separate strokes. 

When the retouching is finished and dry, the picture is varnished; this pro- 
tective coating can, in turn, be dulled or glazed in accordance with the methods 
described In Chapter XI 1. 





JL0OVEE mvmWt SKETCH BY RAFHAEE, ' CONFIRMING THE ASSUMPTIONS AS TO THE 
' AlNJCEYFilAE' MODIFICATION OF RAPHAEL’S WORK AND ITS ATTRIBUTION* 

(SEE FIGS. 43 AND 44 .) 




D. — GOLD GROUND. — ^ GILDING. 


General , Treatment. 

173* — When treating gold grounds and gilding, the principles to he observed, 
will be the same as for paint, and the same treatment should be applied for 
blistering and other deteriorations of the paint layer. ' Special care is, however, 
necessary 'lArhen using water : the bolus on which most gilding is applied Is very, 
susceptible to water and the gold is so thin that it does not provide sufficient 
insulation. 

Cleaning. 

174* — ^ When cleaning gilding, it must be borne in mind that gold grounds 
are sometimes covered by a layer of dark varnish, which may be original and 
intended to attenuate the brilliance of the gilt. This mat covering should be 
respected whenever there is reason to suppose that it existed in the original 

work. , ■ ^ ^ ^ , , / ; ^ , . . 

Another reason for not subjecting the gilding on some paintings to a radical 
cleaning is that, in many cases, it is better preserved than the actual colours and 
might become too conspicuous if thoroughly cleaned. 

Gilding is not only particularly sensitive to the action of agents containing 
water, but very often also to that of alcohol, and still more so to that of ammonia; 
in the majority of cases, therefore, solvents of the hydrocarbon type— ethyl- 
trichloride, etc.— which are safer for this kind of cleaning, should be used. 
Repaints executed in gold or bronze can often be removed with these agents 
without risk of damaging the original gilding. Special care must be exercised 
when treating a gilt prepared with an oil medium, which, of course, reacts to 
different solvents. 



Retouching* j 

175. — Generally speaking, one should practically never attempt to replace 
damaged portions of gilding with new gold; the treatment should be confined 
to retouching in the bolus colour (mostly red, but sometimes yellow or 
There are, at present, very few gilders (frame-makers for the most part) who 
would be capable of reconstituting a seriously damaged or missing portion ot ij 

old gilding in the right quality and tone, and still less of manipulating the punch | 

.•in the correct way. | 



189 



46* BRONZINO*' PORTRAIT, OF A MEDICI BEFORE CLEANING. , . THE FAULTY QUALITY OF THE 
ARMOUR* THE RIGHT HAND, ETC., HAD CREATED SUSPICION. THE RIGHT HAND WAS RADIO- 
GRAPHED (SEE FIGS, 47-49.) 





right hand (detail of the portrait by BRONZINO) SHOWING A 
tOOK ON THE BASIS OF THESE DATA AN EXPERIMENTAL CLEANING WAS 
SHOWED tSt THE REPAINT COULD BE REMOVED WITHOUT ENDAN- 
ThI? THE LATTra^^ WAS IN A GOOD STATE OF PRESERVATION. 
DUCTION, THE BACK OF THE FOREFINGER AND THE UNDERSIDE OF THE 
HAVE BEEN OVER- ACCENTUATED IN THE RETOUCHING.) 









CHAPTER XIV 

MALADIES AND TREATMENT OF THE GROUND 


Definition* 

176 * — The ground or preparation of a picture is a film of uniform colour, 
containing pigment particles and having some appreciable body or thickness, 
which is spread over the support. On this ground, the drawing and the various 
colours of the paint film are laid. (The support is usually composed of wood 
or canvas, or, in rare cases, of stone or metal.) 

Types of Groiind Films. 

177* — Since the film-forming material or the adhesive which holds the 
pigment or inert substance of the ground is the most important constituent so 
far as its deterioration is concerned, a ground can be practically classified accord- 
ing to the general characteristics of the binding medium used for it. These 
media are: 1) crystalline; 2) aqueous, or 3) oleaginous. 

In easel paintings, the crystalline type of medium is probably rare. It may 
be found particularly on early Italian panels where the gesso'-^grosso is made up 
of gypsum with no film-forming adhesive, or in recent paintings if sodium or 
potassium silicate has been used as the medium. 

Aqueous grounds are those in which a water-dissolved medium holds the 
inert ingredients together. Almost all of these media remain more or less 
responsive to the action of water or water-vapour. Casein, of course, would 
not be responsive, but it has so rarely been used in primings that it need not 
be made a separate type. Glues, gums or emulsions rich in glue belong to 
this class. 

The oleaginous grounds include those bound with resin and oil oroleo-resin 
and oil mixture, and emulsions rich in oil, as well as those bound with pure 
drying oil. When thoroughly hardened, these are soluble only in organic 
:solvents. ■ 

It might be said that a fibrous material, like paper, interposed between the 


195 


THE' CONSERVATION OF P A I , N T I N G S 


canvas or panel and the paint film, constitutes another type of ground. Such 
a ground was used in the XVIth century and later, and it is found in a number 
of paintings by Holbein. A recent writer has recommended it (see an article 
by John Lyman: Paper as a Ground for Oil Painting, Technical Studies, I (1933), 
pp, 207-2 II). But properly speaking, paper used in this way is a part of ,a 
compound support and should be so considered. 

Striictare of the Ground and relation to other parts of the Painting* 

178. — The common types of ground — the aqueous and the oleaginous — 
consist of dried films of medium tightly packed with crystals of chalk (CaCOs), 
gypsum (CaSOg), lead white (Pb(OH)4. 2 PbC 03 ), red earth, or like substances 
in combination. 

Tight packing of the inert ■ ingredients is necessary, particularly with the 
aqueous type of preparations, where drying by evaporation results in immediate 
film fractures if the crystals are not close enough together to restrain the shrink- 
age, In the oleaginous type, this shrinkage does not occur for years and the 
defect of excess medium may not be apparent until too late. The mat surface 
required in a priming for practical reasons has, however, led to the incorpor- 
ation of a small quantity of medium in proportion to pigment. 

As regards the composition of the ground throughout the centuries, A. de 
Wild, in his study of the materials in a series of Netherlandish paintings, found 
only chalk. Analyses, however, have often shown the presence of gypsum. 
About the XVIth century, Italian paintings on canvas frequently had a red 
ground, and lead white, mentioned by Vasari, is common in the oleaginous 
grounds of later periods. A. P. Laurie (The Materials of the Painter s Craft, 
London and Edinburgh: T. N. Foulis (1910), pp. 357-364) records a number 
of Renaissance methods of grounding canvas and panels, and a careful study 
of these developments is made by Alexander Eibner in Entwicklung uni Werkr 
staff e der Tafelmalerei (Munich, Heller, 1928, pp, 90-1 15). 

This film may be held to the canvas or wood of the supporting ground by a 
mechanical bond, the intruding parts of the ground film being locked in the 
interstices of the threads, in the voids between the fibres, or In the roughened 
surface of wood. The support is usually primed with a glue size before the 
ground is applied. This intermediate film, applied at first in dilute solution, 
sinks deeper into the material than the thicker ground film could, With 
oleaginous films, this prevents absorption of oil by the canvas on which such 


196 



50 . SMALL XVIITH CENTURY GREEK IKON, IN WHICH THE PULVERULENCE AND SPLITTING OF 
THE PRIMING ARE EVIDENT. THE PRIMING IS OF THE USUAL “‘"GESSO”” TYPE. — AQUEOUS 
MEDIUM WITH PLASTER AS INERT COMPONENT. THE DETERIORATION OF THE MEDIUM PRO- 
BABLY CONTRIBUTED TO THE PRESENT STATE OF THE OBJECT AND PREVENTED THE PRIMING 
FROM FOLLOWING THE MOVEMENT OF THE WOOD AND REDUCED ITS COHESION TO SUCH AN EX- 


TENT THAT THE PAINT LAYER. MORE FIRMLY BOUND, BECAME DETACHED AND FLAKED. 



THE C ,0,N S E R V. A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 


■films usually lie. The relation of the paint film to the ground depends on the 
binding medium employed. Aqueous films .on oleaginous grounds are practi- 
cally unknown, although it has been suggested that oll-resin over gesso was 
used under tempera films in Flemish painting (1). Oleaginous paint films 
on aqueous grounds are much more common, and in view of the analyses by 
,A. de Wild' mentioned above, one may Judge that such a combination must 
have continued well into the XVIIIth century. When oil paint is laid on this 
gesso type of ground, adhesion between the paint film and the film below it 
is mechanical, the oil sinking into the pores beneath. When oil with its usual 
modern diluent— turpentine — is laid on a ground also bound with oil, there is 
probably a slight solution of the under film and a resulting bond that is practi- 
cally a union of the two. In the presence of such a union, any defects will, 
of course, run through both. 

Kinds of Deterioration in Ground Films. 

179. — Mechanically, there are three kinds of deterioration which can be 
noticed in the grounds of old paintings: pulverisation, rupture, and cleavage. 
The first two are products of increasing brittleness, loss of flexibility, hardening, 
shrinkage, and, in some cases, of actual decomposition of the binding medium 
(Figs. 50 and 51). Frequently, both rupture and pulverisation are present, but 
the former is far the more prevalent, being the condition known as crackle or 
crackling. While the ground film is fresh, whether it happens to be aqueous 
or oleaginous, it is elastic. The support at this time, and for as long as it 
retains any continuous texture, responds actively to changes in humidity and 
temperature and is, therefore, constantly moving. While the ground film 
remains elastic, it can move also, staying with the support, and being stretched 
or compressed in the same plane. In an aqueous binding medium, there occurs 
a gradual hardening and weakening of this originally elastic film, the result to 
some extent of an actual release of moisture with reduced ability to take up 
moisture again from the atmosphere. It is possible, also, that micro-organisms 
of a bacteriological kind live in these glue and gum films, slowly utilising them 
as food. 

The oleaginous grounds are not soluble in water, but an old oil film may be 

(f) See Max Doerner; Malmaierial md seine VetWendung im Bilde (Munich, Weizinger, 
1922), p. 29!, and Leon van Fuyvelde; Im technique des peinires Flamands da stick, Annuaire 
general des Beaux-Arts de Belgique (1931), pp. ! 13-120. 


198 



51 . DETAIL OF XIVTH CENTURY 

FLORENTINE FANBL, ' 

AND SPLITTING. THE FR^G^ESSI VE HARD- 
ENING OF THE MEDIUM AQUE- 
OUS PRIMING HAS CAUSED THIS 
BREAK INTO CRACKLES OF CHARACTER- 
ISTIC PATTERN, UNDER THE CONSTANT 
STRESS EXERTED BY THE EXPANSION AND 
CONTRACTION OF THE WOODEN SUPPORT. 


hydrophilic. This, however, is not the principal cause of rupture in such films 
and the observation from general experience that they are rarely pulverised 
makes it seem highly improbable that decomposition from bacteriological causes 
is ever serious. The deterioration of such films is chemical in its nature, result- 
ing largely from a process of oxidation lasting over indefinite periods of time (I). 
In consequence of this oxidation, the film becomes more brittle and its inability 


(1) A. P. Laurie suggests that this change may continue during centuries. See: On the Change 
of Refractive Index of Linseed Oil in the Process of Drying and its Effect on the Deterioration of Oil 
Paintings, Proceedings of the Royal Society, CXI I (1926), Series A. pp. 176-18!. Eibner: 
wkkfmg and Werkstoffe der Tafelmalerei, pp. 51-66. 


199 



THE CONSERVATI ON OF PAINTINGS 


to follow the movements of the support brings about a rupture more or less 
like that of the aqueous ground. 

The cause of cleavage is similar. When the ground film becomes ruptured 
or cracked, the small openings or apertures lying at right angles to the surface 
may allow a play in this film sufficient to take up expansion and contraction in 
the support. If that play is not sufficient, the adhesion of the ground to the 
support will be broken. This is usually accompanied by crackling or rupture 
of the film but is distinct from that because it involves an actual separation from 
the support. Cleavage, therefore, occurs in the plane of the film ; rupture, 
in a direction approximately at right angles to it. 

Signs of Deterioration. 

180. — The two dangerous aspects of this general tendency towards pulver- 
isation, rupture and cleavage are: 

a) increasing concavity of the islands of ground and paint film lying inside 
the crackle lines, sometimes with a tendency to complete separation or cleavage 
— the condition known as scaling (Figs. 50 and 51); 

b) separation or cleavage occurring under a continuous film wth a tendency 
to make the film buckle or rise from the support — the condition known as 
blisiering. 

Naturally, these defects in the ground film carry with them corresponding 
and usually parallel conditions in the paint films, and there may be some doubt 
as to where the actual defect lies. It is less usual, however, in old paintings 
to find scaling and blistering in the paint film alone than to find them in the 
ground. The danger of either defect is obviously the complete loss of paint, 
in the area that suffers. A further danger follows; when there is loss by scaling, 
air, with its varying content of humidity, is admitted more freely to the under 
structure of the paint and the development of scales and blisters will probably 
occur at a more rapid rate (see Fig. 52). In ordinary gallery examinations, 
tendencies toward flaking or blistering can be observed by placing the picture 
in a shaft of raking light or in a vertical light, or by moving the point of observ- 
ation so that the angle of reflection is caught directly by the eye. Either vertical 
or raking light will minimise the colour and value contrasts in the painting and 
will give full effect to variations in texture and in plane. If a noticeable conca- 
vity or convexity of parts is found, the painting should be subjected to a careful 
expert examination to discover the extent and depth of lifting or cleavage. In 


200 






THE CONSERVATION OF P A i N T I N G S 



some cases, particularly in old panel paintings where the wood is very weak, 
deep cleavages will occur which are not visible at the surface. -The reason 
for this is often the presence of a linen support between the gesso and the wood, 
or embedded in the gesso proper. Such a support gives tensile strength to 
the ground film and, because of it, actual treatment can often be safely delayed 
or even avoided entirely. “ Clefts are usually found by ' sounding the surface, 
but even this simple method of examination is not safe unless used by someone 
skilled and experienced. Attempts to determine the condition of a, film by 
tapping it, may cause mutilation. 




Treatment* 



181. — In extreme cases of pulverisation, it may be necessary to transfer the 
painting, Usually, such a general deterioration of the priming film occurs in 
thick primings of gesso and may result, in the crystalline type, from dismte- 
gration of the gypsum. Usually, also, it is accompanied by extensive decay 
in the wooden panel and this requires transference to effect a remedy. Compa- 
ratively, however, these cases are rare and the usual treatment given to ground 
defects is flattening and re-setting of blistering and scaling films. A great 
number of techniques and a variety of combinations of adhesive materials have 
been developed for these operations. At present, it may be said that if the 
capability of the restorer and his experience in dealing with this condition are 
established, the actual technique or manipulation can be taken as acceptable. 
As to the question of the adhesive material, an exact answer is impossible, for 
that material will have to be adjusted to the case in hand. A warning may be 
entered, however, against the indiscriminate use of glue or similar aqueous 
solutions. In cases where the paint film itself is soluble in water, these solutions 
could hardly be considered at all; but even where the paint film is oleaginous, 
dangers are involved in the use of such adhesives, It must be remembered 
that to make a secure union some degree of heat and a certain amount of pressure 
are usually required. Heat applied to a submerged glue or gum film in a gel 
or semi-dry state rapidly drives off water in the form of vapour or steam. This 
vapour must find its way out to the surface and, in so doing, is obliged to filter 
through the tissues immediately surrounding the locality treated. If these 
tissues are composed, so far as their binding medium is concerned, of an old 
and considerably oxidised oil film, they will be hydrophilic, that is, capable 
of absorbing some amount of moisture when this is carried through them in 

202 





53 . CRACKLE OF THE PRIMING AND THE PAINT LAYER, TYPICAL OF NORTHERN PAINTINGS, 
MID-XVTH CENTURY, PROBABLY DUE TO THE TRACTION EXERTED BY THE WOOD ON THE 

PAINT LAYERS. 




THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


such a form. The inevitable result is swelling of these tissues, with' subse- 
quent shrinking and with the danger of further cleavage adjacent to that already 
treated. 

The chapters dealing with the paint layer and the various types of supports 
, give a detailed description of a series of treatments, which necessarily apply 
also to the ground; those chapters should therefore be consulted for comple- 
mentary particulars of a practical character in connection with this scientific 
study of the structure and function of the ground film (§§ 144-156). 


204 


CHAPTER XV 


MALADIES AND TREATMENT OF CANVAS 
A. — TEXTURE, CHARACTERISTICS, PROPERTIES 


Uses* 

182* — Woven linen fabric was used, in conjunction with papyrus, in Ancient 
Egypt for the construction of the painted cartonnages of mummies. It was 
also used in the East for covering wood which was to be decorated with lacquer, 
and for covering the joints of the wooden panels required by the mediaeval tem- 
pera painter. It was not until the XVth century that it began to be used alone 
as a separate support for painting. When used in this way, it had the merit of 
being light in weight and allowed the artist to execute easel paintings on a much 
larger scale than was possible when his work was restricted to the wooden panel. 

Texture. 

183. — The name “canvas” is applied to any woven fabric which can, in itself, 
form a suitable support for painting. The textiles most commonly used for 
this purpose are made from linen and hemp. These are strong and durable. 
Cotton is lighter in weight and less satisfactory. 

When used as a separate support for painting, the canvas has to be sized and 
primed, that is, covered with a ground which shall fulfil the twofold function 
of protecting the fibres from any deleterious action on the part of the binding 
media or pigments. There are thus two classes of artist s canvas: 1) the raw 
cloth (unprimed) canvas, used for repair work (patching and relining) and 2) 
the prepared or primed canvas, used for painting. 

Characteristics. 

184. — The best canvases for use by the restorer or the artist are woven entirely 
from the same kind of thread in warp and weft. The canvas should be rea- 
sonably heavy and tightly woven, so that it does not require an excessive amount 
of priming to fill the interstices in order to form a suitable painting ground; 
the threads should be free from knots. 

When these conditions are satisfied, the weaving (tabby or twill) is of less 

205 


T H E C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 


importance. The plain or tabby weaves are the commonest; fancy twill weaves 
are chosen for special work, e.g. portraiture; coarse weaves give texture and 
character; fine weaves and lighter canvases are used for more delicate work. 

Influence of Temperature and Humidity, 

185 , — Canvas reacts characteristically to changes in the hygrometric condition 
of the atmosphere. When the humidity is relatively high, the threads contract, 
and, if the fabric has been stretched on a frame it tightens. Under normal con- 
ditions, the fibres carry about 12% of moisture. Excessive dryness, as is caused 
sometimes when a picture is hung over a fireplace, causes dehydration and the 
canvas expands and is, moreover, weakened as a result of desiccation. 

The effect of these changes is notably lessened when a picture has been backed 
by another canvas (relined), because the adhesive which is used to unite the 
canvases and which penetrates the threads renders them less susceptible to 
external influences. 

The paint layer itself is influenced by atmospheric changes, in the opposite 
direction to the canvas, though to a smaller degree. It contracts on desiccation 
and expands slightly under moist conditions; this explains why painted canvases 
are, on the whole, more prone to suffer from the flaking away of the paint than 
is the case with painted wooden panels. (See also §§ 43 and 44). 

The Stretcher, 

186. — In order to keep the canvas absolutely flat, a wooden stretcher is em- 
ployed which is capable of adjustment by keys. For small canvases, a plain 
rectangular stretcher is all that is required; for larger canvases, the stretcher 
has to be reinforced by cross-pieces so that it will not twist during the straining 
of the canvas — either in the process of mounting or if the fabric tightens in 
damp weather. 

All the wooden members of the stretcher should be bevelled or chamfered 
so that the wood touches the canvas only round the edges and the canvas does 
not adhere to the flat surfaces of the framing; cross members should be kept at 
least 1 cm. from the back of the canvas and if this precaution is not taken a 
pattern of cracks appears in the ground and paint layer, marking the edges of 
the wooden members and Irreparably damaging the painting. The canvas 
should be stretched uniformly and mounted so that the warp and weft threads 
are parallel to the sides of the stretcher. 


206 





PAINTINGS 



i THE CONSERVATION 


0 F 







Manifestations ' of Decay. 

187. — When a canvas is woven from weak fibres, such as jote, or from fibres 
of poor quality, the strength is often largely that of the sizing or ‘batter', and 
when this decays the canvas rots. But even the best canvases do not last inde- 
finitely. Although cellulose Is normally chemically inert and very stable, it 
becomes brittle by oxidation, and this is accelerated by contact with a drying 
oil. To counteract this oxidation, the fibres are protected by a coating of size 
before the application of the priming. Glue size is commonly used and is per- 
fectly effective so long as the canvas is kept reasonably dry. It is nevertheless 
a nutrient material for moulds and bacteria, which not only destroy its protec- 
tive qualities, but rot the canvas itself. This takes place most quickly in a damp 
heat and is of chief significance when, for any reason, canvases have to be stored 
in cellars. 

A weakened canvas may be further damaged by being over-tightened in hot 
weather. When the air becomes cooler, the canvas may be torn as a result 
of the Increased strain imposed upon it by the deposition of moisture. A more 
rapid and insidious type of damage results from quick changes in atmospheric 
conditions, as, for example, when a sensitive canvas is exposed in a room heated 
by steam radiators, which quickly lose their heat when the steam is shut off. 
When the air cools, the humidity is increased and deposits in the surroundings. 
The constant movement of the canvas and the continuous readjustments that 
take place in the paint layer cause accelerated deterioration. 

Even under the best conditions, a painting on canvas cannot be expected to 
last indefinitely, and there comes a time when it must be relined If it Is to be 
preserved. 

The processes of reinforcing, or even of replacing, the old canvas have been 
so perfected today that there are grounds for believing that, In spite of its ephe- 
meral nature, canvas is still the most desirable form of paint support. 


208 



B. — GENERAL MEASURES OF PROTECTION 


Atmospheric ConditioiiSo 

188* It follows from what has been said regarding manifestations of decay 
that the principal causes of deterioration are: a) moist heat^ which encourages 
the growth of bacteria, and b) constant changes in the hygrometric conditions 
of the air, which result in accelerated weakening of the paint film. Preventive 
nieasures are therefore concerned with maintaining the temperature and humi- 
dity as constant, as possible, within reasonable limits, say 60-80® C. and 55- 
65% relative humidity. 

Position of Paintings* 

189* If there should be any reason to doubt that conditions in a gallery are 
not absolutely favourable, measurements of temperature, and humidity should 
be taken in different parts of the room over a period of some weeks or months 
as the^ case may be. If a picture is pasted Into a glazed frame, the variations 
to which it is exposed will be less intense than those which obtain in the room, 
and therefore some such type of mounting is an important precaution when 
it is difficult or impossible to control the atmosphere of the room itself within 
the required limits. 

Gas Fumes* 

190* The rotting of canvas is accelerated by gas fumes and by the fumes of 
burning coke which contain sulphur dioxide gas. Consequently, the question 
of adequate ventilation becomes important, for example in churches heated by 
coke stoves where valuable pictures are on exhibition. 

Heating* 

191* — Reference has already been made to the dangers of hanging pictures 
over a fireplace, because of the risk of damage by excessive dehydration. Simi- 
lar precautions are necessary in rooms where the panel heating system is adopted : 
heat may be concentrated at certain points in the wall of the room and the 


209 


14 


THE CONSERVATION O F PAINTINGS 


curator can only discover by using a thermometer how; the heat is distributed 
and hang his pictures accordingly, so that they are not exposed to extremes. 

Tension of the Canvas. 

192. — In spite of all possible precautions, it will be found that many canvases 
suffer a seasonal expansion and contraction; it then becomes necessary to make 
suitable adjustment of the stretcher keys. Over-tightening of the canvas must, 
however, be avoided at all costs, for the consequences might be disastrous should 
the canvas then contract under the influence of a sudden increase in humidity. 

When, notwithstanding all these precautions, the original canvas becomes 
weakened, the only way of saving the picture will be to reinforce or replace the 
support. There is no other method that is really effective for strengthening 
an old canvas. 

Protection of the Back of the Canvas. 

193. — In order to protect the back of the canvas from mechanical damage, and 
to insulate the painting from the wall, a protective sheet (aluminium, ply-board, 
cardboard or canvas) may, with advantage be nailed or screwed on to the back 





C. - CARE AND TREATMENT 


L Local Repairs. 


Bulges and Dents. 

194® Mild cases of . bulges and dents can very often be correctecl by ■nioist*' 
ening^ tbe back of the canvas with a saturated solution of alum in water and then 
^ hot iron (see below: Ironing, A bulge in the canvas is frequently 
due to some body which has fallen between the canvas and the stretcher 
(wedge, nail, plaster, etc.). Once this body has been removed, a thin sheet of 
stiff cardboard can be inserted between the stretcher and the canvas and the 
ironing done from the front. 

PatcMog. 

195. — When a canvas painting is torn, it should, as a rule, be relined. But 
when the value of the picture does not warrant the expense of complete relining, 
a patch can sometimes be applied with success. 

The most suitable material for a patch is very thin muslin; a piece slightly 
larger than the area of the damage is soaked in the usual warm-lining mixture 
(see below) and pressed evenly on the back of the tear. The loose threads 
of the canvas and particles of paint along the edge of the tear are carefully put 
back into place with tweezers or some similar instrument and pressed down into 
the adhesive of the patch. A sheet of parchment paper is next laid over the 
back and front of the picture and the torn area ironed, on the front, with a flat 
iron heated to about 60 ° C., on a flat and even table. When pastose brushwork 
is present, a layer of felt should be placed over the parchment paper when the 
painting is ironed from the front. 

The use of any material thicker than muslin, and of animal glue as adhesive, 
would cause the canvas to bulge owing to the contraction which takes place on 
drying. Muslin and the adhesive recommended below will prove quite strong 
enough. 

When a canvas shows a serious bulge and when the paint film has been marked 
by the edges of the stretcher, the picture must be relined. 


i. 


211 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 

II. Relining. 


Definition. 

|9g_ _ Jlie Hning process which consists in stretching a new canvas on the 
back of the original support is now generally referred to as relining . ^ This 
is not correct, because ^ ^ rehning in the true sense of the term would imply 
the removal of the original canvas and replacing it by a new one. This process 
is usually called ^Transfer” (see below, §§ 216-224). 

Cases requiring Relining. 

197, — Relining is often carried out as a preventive measure for paintings that 
are still in good condition, on the assumption that all canvas paintings will, 
sooner or later, have to undergo this treatment. There are, however, cases of 
well-preserved canvas paintings, several centuries old, which do not yet need 
relining. There is not much to be said against relining as a precautionary 
measure, if it is properly executed, except that many curators maintain that 
paintings should be interfered with as little as possible. 

The chief reasons for relining are: general brittleness or flaking of the ground 
or paint layer (see Chapter XIII); very often, these layers may still be in a fairly 
good state of preservation, but the canvas itself has become so brittle or weak- 
ened that it needs reinforcing. When a canvas has not been sufficiently iso- 
lated by a coating of size before the application of the oil paint, or when it has 
been oiled from behind, the acid formed during the oxidation of the oil gra- 
dually destroys the canvas. This would appear to be a more frequent cause 
of disintegration than moisture, mould, etc. 

Function of the Adhesive. 

198. — All adhesive mixtures used for lining are melted by heat during 
the process; they successively penetrate the new canvas, the original canvas 
and fill the crackles in the priming as well as of the paint layer, ultimately 
reaching [the surface of the paint. As will be seen later, it is possible to verify 
that the impregnation has reached the paint film: the paper used as a surface 
protection will show traces of the adhesive if the latter has really penetrated 
into the crakles. (Fig. 56). 

The function of the adhesive is not only to hold the new and the old canvas 


212 



THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS S 

" ' ' ' ' ' '' ’ -i 

together in an efficient and lasting way, but also to penetrate the original canvas 
and the priming, and to secure any particles of paint that may be loose or separ- 
ated by cracks. It should, at the same time, preserve the canvases from disin- 
tegration without altering the optical properties of the ground or of the paint 
layer* 

Composition of Adhesives, 

199^ — There are two groups of adhesives that can be used for relining : glue 
paste, and wax resin mixture. These two preparations are not Irreconcilable; 
glue or wax alone is rarely used for relining nowadays : glue without the addition 
of a balsam is not sufficiently elastic and would be too sensitive to damp and 
mould; on the other hand, wax without the addition of a certain quantity of 
resin would not, in the majority of cases, be sufficiently adhesive. Moreover, 
a painting relined with wax alone as the adhesive could not be satisfactorily 
revarnished; the wax which works its way through from the back, at least in 
the parts which are crackled, would deteriorate practically any varnish applied 
to the surface of the picture. 

The fact that, in common parlance, the expressions “glue method” or “wax 
method” have been adopted (whereas glue and wax are, in both cases, only the 
prevalent ingredients) has given rise to much misunderstanding and unnecessary 
controversy. 

Both of these adhesives can be varied considerably by the addition of plasti- 
cisers or hardening substances in different proportions. They can even be 
combined to form a composite adhesive. 

The type of adhesive must, of course, be chosen and adapted for each special 
case. There is, as yet, no universal adhesive that would suit every category 
of picture. (Below will be found a detailed description of the various mixtures, 
with an indication of their respective values.) A word of warning is necessary 
regarding the use of any adhesive which contains a large proportloB of oil, owing 
to the danger of staining and yellowing the ground and even the paint. 

The discovery of polymerised vinyl acetate — a synthetic resin — has given 
promising results, but owing to its relatively recent use it cannot yet be generally 
recommended. Its chief advantage is that it is colourless. 

Glue Adhesives. ■ 

200. — Many adhesives containing some kind of glue as the main ingredient 


213 








have, from the earliest times, been used with more or less success. We shall 
confine ourselves to describing in detail only those that have best stood the test 
of time and proved their value under scientific examination. 

Though adhesives of this type are being more and more discarded for relining 
work, it will not be inappropriate to deal with them here, because they cannot 
be entirely dispensed with in special cases and because there are many instances 
of successful glue relinings to be seen in picture galleries. 

It must be emphasised, however, that a badly executed glue relining is far 

215 


56 . RELINING OF AN XVIIITH CENTURY PORTRAIT. DETAIL (ENLARGED) OF THE 
PREVIOUS FIGURE. THE SURFACE PROTECTION OF TISSUE PAPER SHOWS, AFTER THE 
OPERATION, DARK MARKS CORRESPONDING TO THE SPOTS WHERE THE ADHESIVE HAS 
PENETRATED THROUGH THE CRACKLES. 




|‘ T H £ C 0 N S E R V A-T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 

I i more dangerous for a picture than an unsuccessful wax lining. The reasons 

i for this become evident when we examine the principal drawbacks, 

| : Disadvantages of Glue Relining. 

: 2§L — When a glue adhesive has been used, the relining can rarely be removed 

without damaging the paint layer, because the canvases must be moistened and 
i scraped. ^ ■ 

I ; The steam which is necessarily produced during the process of ironing is apt 

‘ to affect the ground, and even the actual paint in the case of size or tempera 

paintings. 

Mould and other maladies of this kind may attack the paint layer. 

I Changes in the degree of atmospheric humidity cause appreciable expansion 

^ and contraction of the glue, which are likely to affect all the layers of the picture. 

The slightest fault committed in the course of the operation (uneven dlstri- 
I bution of the adhesive mixture, etc.) cannot be remedied, for once the adhesive 

ll? has dried and hardened, it cannot be remelted or softened. 

I On the whole, all adhesives containing any considerable proportion of water 

I are definitely dangerous to certain types of paintings, for example those of the 

I ' XIXth century, 

i, 

i Attenuation of these Disadvantages. 

202. — All the disadvantages indicated above can, to a certain extent, be atten- 
uated by the addition of appropriate substances. First of all, a plasticiser must 
be added to the glue; Venice turpentine has so far proved very useful for this 
purpose. Glycerin, on the other hand, would merely Increase the suscepti- 
bility of the picture to the effects of moisture. 

Secondly, the addition of some ingredient is necessary to facilitate the dissol- 
ving of the adhesive when the relining has to be removed. Flour paste is very 

suitable for this purpose. u , 

Finally, a lasting disinfectant should be incorporated to prevent mould and 
rotting of the canvas; a small quantity of sodium-fluoride is to be recommended; 
it is a non-volatile substance and does not appreciably affect the adhesive pro- 
perties of the mixture used. 

A fairly large proportion of Venice turpentine is needed to counteract the 
powerful tracf ion of the glue. 



216 


THE CONSERVAT ION OF P A I N T IN G S 


Eecipes* 

2i3® — The following recipe is given as a rough indication of ^ what should ^be 
used for a preparation to be employed for an average picture; it may be varied 
considerably to meet the requirements of individual cases. 

Glue . 3 parts by volume 

Venice turpentine ...... 1 

Flour % to 1 — 

Disinfectant 

For the purposes of the above formula, the glue and the flour are prepared 
with warm water to the consistency of the Venice turpentine and the quantities 
are then measured as required for the rehning mixture, the disinfectant being 

stirred in last, ^ ^ i • i i 

A mixture of flour and Venice turpentine without glue is also commonly 

used, but the adhesive thus obtained Is probably not so lasting. 

These composite adhesives should be subjected to scientific tests. 

Advantages of Glue and Disadvantages of Wax- 

204 . — The chief advantage of the glue mixture lies in its strong adhesive 
power — an important property in the case of very large canvases (especially 
in hot climates), which would be too heavy for a ivax adhesive, or when 
relining pictures that have developed bumps or depressions in the paint layer 
and in such a high state of tension that it would be impossible to reduce and 
maintain them in position by using a weaker adhesive. . , 

This point is also important when one has the Intention of cleaning the 
picture, after rellning, with a solvent that would tend to dissolve a wax adhesive. 
Even weak solvents, such as turpentine, would penetrate through the cra<^s, 
thereby softening the wax and the resin (alcohol would not attack the wax but 
the resin), and again loosen the particles of paint which the relining was prima- 

rily destined to save. ^ ^ r i r i 

Another advantage of a glue adhesive is that it interferes but very lirae mth 

the optical properties of most primings (reflecting power). Wax, on the other 
hand, would slightly reduce the reflecting power of a more or less absorbent 
white priming, and thus darken somewhat a transparent painting executed on 

such a ground. . . , . , 

In the case of an oil painting, the wax which penetrates into the paint layer 


217 





THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 

or which even spreads over its surface through the crackles would reduce the 
depth (transparency) of the colours a little and thus make the dark tones appear 
a shade lighter and duller. In an old master — a Rembrandt or a Titian, for 
example — this loss of transparency would alter the effect originally intended 
by the artist. Moreover, as mentioned above, a varnish applied to a painting 
in such a condition would not retain its transparency and would tend to crackle. 



Remedies. 

205 . — These drawbacks can, however, be met by adding a little resin, as a 
hardening ingredient, to the wax. Rosin (colophony) is generally used for 
this purpose and has so far proved very successful. In inferior grades, it has 
the disadvantage of being rather dark, so that for bright paintings, or for pic- 
tures where the white priming plays an important part, none but the clearest 
quality should be used. 

The combination of wax and resin gives too brittle a composition and some 
kind of balsam has to be added to ensure sufficient elasticity. For this purpose, 
Venitlan turpentine is the most frequently used, but gum elemi or Canada 
balsam would probably give equally good results. 

The exact proportion of the ingredients does not seem to be of any great 
importance and may be modified to suit individual cases (account being taken 

of the melting-point, etc.), as has been shown by scientific tests. 

The following may be recommended as an average recipe: 

Beeswax. . ... . .... . 5 parts by weight 

Rosin . . . . . 2-4 — 

Venetian turpentine. . . . . .1 — — 

Owing to its very low adhesive power, paraffin is unsuitable as an ingredient 
of a mixture to be used for relining purposes; it may, however, be used as a 
diluent for wax resin mixtures, particularly for reducing the melting-point of 
the mixture. Paraffin facilitates the even distribution of the adhesive. The 
addition of a small quantity of essence of turpentine is harmless and would 
serve the same purpose. 

Wax glue emulsions. 

206 . — No systematic study, based on the results of scientific tests, has as yet 
been published on wax glue emulsions; in practice, however, these preparations 



218 



THE CONSER V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 


have often given satisfaction^ but we cannot, for the time being, yecommend 

any particular formula. ^ i • l l 

Generally . speaking, most of the glue mixtures can be emulsiflea with toe 
wax compositions, but there can be no doubt that the simpler the formula the 
better. If glue is added to a wax mixture, the resin should be omitted, for 
the glue takes its place as the hardening factor. ^ ^ ^ 

It is not easy to prepare an emulsion that would not split up again under the 
heat of the iron. All the ingredients must be fairly thick and kept warm, but 
not hot, during the mixing. The order in which the different substances are 
added is also important. 

Other Emulsioiis. 

207. — If the wax, thinned slightly with turpentine, is first saponified by the 
addition of a little ammonium carbonate dissolved in water, it is more easily 
incorporated with the glue. The perfect emulsion is that which absorbs 
as well as turpentine as a diluent. The quantity of water added should, of 
course, be reduced to a minimum. 

Whatever proportion may be adopted, the emulsion should be tried out on a 
small square of canvas and tested for adhesive power and elasticity. It must 
also be ascertained that it does not dry too white and so disturb the appearance 
of the picture wherever the adhesive has penetrated to the surface. It must 
also be borne in mind that an emulsion sets and hardens during the process of 
ironing; the latter operation therefore demands a certain rapidity and skill. 

The following substances may be recommended for the preparation of an 
emulsion; wax (saponified), Venetian turpentine, and glue. 

When cold, all adhesives should form an elastic substance but just hard 
enough to be scarcely marked by the impression of a finger-nail. 

Fixing the Canvas to the Stretcher, 

Stretching. 

2Qg. — With the exception of small pictures, all paintings that are to be rellned 
should be stretched on a frame measuring about 5 cms. more than the painting 
along all four sides. The four borders of the canvas are fixed to the frame by 
means of strips of strong packing paper stuck down with glue. When the glue 
is dry, the paper is moistened and, as it dries, automatically stretches the canvas. 


219 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAIN TINGS 


Surface Protection* 

209 . — In order to protect the surface of the painting against the detrimental 
effect of moisture in the adhesive, or of the water used to damp the back for 
dissolving the priming, all pictures should first be covered with a thick layer 
of mastic oil'-varnish, which is removed at the end of the operation. The 
varnish should be thoroughly dry before the paper is applied. In cases where 
the paint Is not detached from the ground and where the picture is being relined 
as a precautionary measure, or because of small tears or similar damage, there 
will l 3 e no necessity to stick the paper to the_jpainting; it may simply be laid 
over it, as an insulation from the felt and can thus be lifted from time to time 
in order to check the progress of the operation. 

In all other cases, a sheet of tissue paper should be pasted over the paint layer. 
Whenever a painting is to be subjected to a treatment that involves some kind 
of concussion or vibration, such as the removal of an old support by scraping 
or tearing, the paint film should first be protected by one or two sheets of 
tissue paper, a piece of muslin and, finally, several layers of paper, all of which 
are stuck down with diluted glue mixed with glycerine. The adhesive used 
for this purpose should be easily removable, if possible dry, or at least with a 
minimum of moisture. It should exert but slight traction; strong glues and 
mixtures containing casein are therefore unsuitable. 

Flour paste has frequently been recommended for this purpose, but it should 
not be used without the addition of a little Venice turpentine; otherwise it often 
becomes brittle and may spring off in places, tearing particles of paint away 
before they are secured, A safer adhesive is a solution of gelatine or gum arable 
with a few drops of glycerin. These solutions have the advantage of being 
more rapidly removable. In any case, the type of adhesive employed should 
be specially adapted to suit the painting to be treated and should always be 
tested beforehand on samples or on the edge of the picture. 

Felt or other Bedding. 

210. — In order to prevent the surface texture, impasto brushwork, etc., 
from being flattened down by the Ironing, the painting, with its protective cover- 
ing of paper, should be laid on a bedding of felt. The thickness of the felt 
will vary according to the depth of the protuberant portions of the paint layer. 

For the treatment of extreme cases — a Van Gogh, for example — felt is not 
sufficient and a bedding of finely sifted sawdust must be used instead; the 


220 


THE CONS ERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


sawdust should be kept in place by strips of wood nailed to the edges of the 
table and pressed, with a box, so as to form an even and compact bed. 

A suitable insulating material, which may be used instead of paper, is tinfoil; 
a sheet of this adjusts itself to all surface irregularities under the pressure of 
the brush. 

Ironing table. 

211. — The ideal working table for relining and similar operations is a thick 
slab of slate, kept at the suitable temperature (about 50-60° C.) by an adjustable 
electrical heating device underneath. This makes it possible to ensure a uniform 
melting through of the adhesive to the surface of the paint, thus dispensing 
with the ironing of the front (on the felt bedding), which is often necessary to 
obtain thorough adhesion. A more complicated equipment is needed m the 
case of a sawdust bedding. The table must, of course, be heated to a higher 
temperature when dealing with special cases and should be fitted with thick 
felt mats, etc. 

The Iron. 

212. — An excellent type of iron has been designed for relining, but an ordinary 

tailor’s iron may be used, provided that it is fitted with an adjustable resistance 
between the plug and the iron to maintain a steady temperature. The iron 
should also be fitted with a thermometer, if not a thermostat, by which the 

amount of heat can be controlled. r i • i ■ 

It should be pointed out that to check the temperature of the insulating 
material (felt or paper) is not directly conclusive, because the paint layer itself 
can accumulate far more heat than the insulating layer. This simple remark 
is sufficient to indicate that considerable experience, concentration and patience 
are essential for this process of ironing. 

Cleaning of the Old Canvas. 

213. — When a painting is removed from Its original stretcher, the dirt on the 
back of the canvas should be cleaned off with a fairly stiff brush. Labels of 
any interest should be carefully soaked off and preserved, but never stuck on to 
the new canvas as this would cause it to bulge; they can be stuck on to the 
stretcher. If the old stretcher is sufficiently well preserved, it is preferable not 


221 





57 , RE-LINING OF A VAN GOGH, PREPARATION OF THE SAWDUST BED ON WHICH THE 
PAINTING IS LAID FACE DOWNWARDS AND WHICH PREVENTS THE CRUSHING OF THE IMPAS- 
TATION DURING THE OPERATION. 


to discard it for a new one. If it is made without wedges, it can sometimes 
be converted to receive them. 

Lettering and other particulars inscribed directly on the canvas should be 
photographed. 

The edges of the original canvas, folded back over and nailed to the stretcher 
should always be retained. Until they have been thoroughly cleaned, it is 
impossible to know whether or not they carry a portion of the paint layer and, 
moreover, they alone permit of relining the picture satisfactorily. 

The original canvas is then carefully cleaned (filed) to give it an even surface 
and to make it more permeable to the adhesive, at the same time neutralising 
its tractive power. These operations should never be carried out without 
laying the painting on a felt mat and the cleaning should be completed by a 








THE SURFACE IS PRO* 
A BRUSH TO ENSURE 


58 . THE EDGES OF THE PAINTING ARE HEED BY STRIPS OF STRONG PAPER. 
TECTED BY SHEETS OF THIN PAPER OR TINFOIL, PRESSED DOWN WITH 


ADHESION TO THE CONTOURS OF THE SURFACE. 


careful polishing with pumice stone or sand paper to ensure proper adhesion. 


Application of the New Canvas. 

214. — The new canvas should be smooth and of fairly heavy quality, but not 
necessarily of the same quality as the original support. It should be stretched 
on a stretcher the inside measurements of which are about 3 cms. more than 
the painting; it should be unprimed but, for normal cases, thinly sized.^ All 
irregularities, which would necessarily make an impression on the original 
canvas during the process of ironing, should be filed off. The new canvas 
should first be soaked with the adhesive, and to avoid a patchy appearance care 
must be taken to ensure that the adhesive is absorbed evenly. 

223 




In certain cases, it may be preferable to spread the adhesive fairly thinly on 
the old as well as the new canvas, both being laid on the warm table. 

The successive stages of the operation are briefly as follows: on the warm 
slate slab, we have first of all the felt mat (or the bedding of sawdust), next the 
sheet of insulating paper (which, in the majority of cases, is stuck on to the sur^- 
face of the picture), and, lastly, the painting, face downwards, fixed to its 
stretcher by strips of adhesive paper. The back of the picture is then given a 
thin coating of adhesive. The new canvas, also smeared with adhesive and 
fixed to its stretcher (slightly smaller than that of the old canvas) is now laid 
(stretcher upwards) on the back of the original support. 

The ironing is, as a rule, done from ^hlnd, starting in the middle and work- 
ing in a radial Erection to press all air pockets towards the edges. This re- 
quires considerable experience and skill: if the iron is too hot or moved too 
slowly, too much of the adhesive will be melted out, or may even be burnt; on 


224 


THE CONSERVATION 


PA IN TIN G S 


the other hand, if the iron is not hot enough or is moved too quickly, the quan- 
tity of adhesive melted will be insufficient and will, therefore, be unevenly dis- 
tributed. The wax resin adhesive does not, of course, stick while it is still hot; 
the iron must therefore be cooled for the next stage of the operation, to ensure 
adhesion between the two canvases by pressure. 

When paintings that have a rough texture or a high Impasto are ironed from 
the front, no felt or other soft bedding should be placed beneath the new canvas, 
because the parts of the paint layer in relief would be pressed down into the 

bedding. , „ 

Ironing — or at least warming from the front — should be continued until the 
melting-point of the adhesive is reached, if it is wished to make the latter pene- 
trate to the surface of the paint layer (to secure loose particles, etc.). 

Pressing. 

215. — When dealing with particularly tenacious cases of tension, waving, bulg- 
ing, crackle, etc., it is sometimes necessary, after the relinlng operation, to press 
the two canvases together in a special appliance composed of boards and car- 
penter’s screws. In extreme cases, a second canvas has to be stuck on to the 
first relinlng canvas; in other words, the whole operation has to be repeated. 

Occasionally, certain cracks which have not been sufficiently reduced during 
the process of relining will have to be ironed again separately with a small Iron 
or with the small spatula used for the treatment of blisters. (See Chapter XIII). 


III. Transfer. 


Cases needing Transfer. 

216. — The Indiscriminate use of the expression “relinlng” has led the unini- 
tiated to believe that whenever a picture is ' * relined ’ ’ the original canvas is 
removed. As already mentioned, in the majority of cases, the old canvas is 
retained and the operation consists simply In reinforcing it by a new canvas, 
that is to say, it is “ lined’ ’. The problem is quite different with a panel paint- 
ing that is threatened with deterioration on account of the condition of the 
wood (rot, worm-holes, etc. See Chapter XVI). 

It is, however, easy to disinfect a disintegrated canvas and once it has been 
properly lined it will no longer constitute a danger to the painting. 


225 


15 


T H E C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 


I But when the deterioration has reached the priming, the picture will have to 

I be transferred to a new support. A transfer is also necessary in the two following 

cases: when the paint has become brittle or has a tendency to flake away from 
the ground, which, in turn, detaches itself from the canvas; or when the priming 
) is so thick that the adhesive would not penetrate it sufficiently to secure the 

i loose particles of paint. In this latter case, the thickness of the priming must 

j also be reduced by scraping, after removal of the canvas. 

1 

I Choice of a New Support. 

i 217. — On the whole, the procedure followed for a transfer is the same as that 

! adopted for panel paintings. It should be stressed, however, that the transfer 

j of a painting from wood to canvas — a common operation in the XIXth century 

I is no longer practised today. Canvas was formerly, and rightly, regarded as 

the safer support, but in practically every case the character of the painting, 
transferred to canvas, was altered: the texture penetrated more or less into the 
paint layer; the painting assumed a certain rectilinear or misleading aspect on 
account of the new crackles that appeared. 

The main objection to wood as a new support (expansion, contraction, warp- 
ing) is met by the modern use of plywood or artificial panels (see Chapter XVI); 
moreover, effective means are now available for protecting the wood against 
insects, growths and other deteriorations. 

It is therefore possible to establish the principle that, in order to preserve 
the original character of a painting, it should always be transferred to a support 

of the same material, that is, from canvas to canvas, or from wood to wood. 

A transfer is, of course, a more complicated operation than a simple relinlng, 

! , but it is far less dangerous than the uninitiated generally believe. The expe- 

rienced restorer can execute a transfer without sacrificing the smallest particle 
i of the original paint. He will, however, often ask the owner to claim no com- 

I pensation in the event of a slight loss of paint. 

j! Surface Protection. 

i 218. - It IS the method usually adopted for protecting the surface of a painting 

;i that makes the process such a safe one. 

Paper is stuck on to the surface of the painting, as for a lining operation, but 
i for a transfer the paper is always reinforced; in the case of a smooth picture, 

j|* several sheets of paper or a single sheet of cardboard are used; if the picture has 



226 



DIAGRAM SHOWING THE SCHEME OF RELINING 


Before lining; section of the canvas and stretcher, face downwards. 


2. Protective paper attached to fix the paint layer; the picture unmounted from 

its stretcher. 


3. Paper strips attached around the picture so that it may he stretched on a 
larger frame. 


4. The process of lining using the hot table. A felt pad is placed between the 
picture and the table and the new canvas, mounted on its own provisional 
stretcher, is attached to the back of the picture. Reading downwards, the 
section shows ; the frame with the new canvas; the frame with the picture 
bordered with paper strips; the sheet of protective paper applied to the surface 
of the painting; the felt pad, and the hot table. 


5. After the adhesive has penetrated uniformly and been allowed to cool some- 
what, the paper strips are cut away. 




II 


6. Final stage: the relining canvas is stretched after cutting away excess; the 
protective paper is removed from the picture and the edges are consolidated 
by covering with adhesive tape or strips of paper. 





C ONSERVATION 


P A I N T IN G S 


a rough surface texture, a layer of wax (the melting-point of which is higher than 
that of the adhesive), gesso, or papier mache is spread between the sheets of 
paper. The protective covering of paper should dry on the picture under pres- 
sure, so that one may be absolutely certain that it adheres perfectly everywhere 
and that no air pockets remain. 

Removal of the Support. 

219. — When the surface protection is dry, the picture is laid, face downwards, 
on the bench and carefully fastened to it by some device such as carpenter’s 
screws. 

The canvas is then gradually removed, either by filing or by cautious damp- 
ing; sometimes a mild acid solution is used. Very often, the threads of the 
canvas can be pulled out once the priming has thus been partly dissolved. 
Cardboard or paper supports can be removed in a similar way. 

A wood support is first planed and finally chipped away with fine chisels; the 
last layer can often be pulled off when the priming is sufficiently inolst. 

One should never attempt to remove large areas of canvas or priming in one 
operation; one must proceed in short stages, working in small squares, care 
being taken to secure the rest of the picture by screwing boards over it. 

Removal of the Ground. 

220. — A deteriorated gesso or other size priming — more frequently found on 
panels than on canvas— should be gradually removed by further filing or by 
rubbing with a damp swab. 

Oil primings rarely disintegrate, but if it should be found necessary to remove 
such a layer it must be filed off dry or carefully cleaned off like an overpalnt. 

In some cases, a thin layer of priming may be allowed to remain if found 
intact, or even thicker layers if they can stand a treatment by impregnation. 

Photographic Record. 

221. — When all the priming has been removed and the actual paint appears at 
the back, this should be photographed and described in detail; valuable infor- 
mation on the technique of the particular master or school will often be recorded 
in this way. 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


Application of the New Ground, 

222. — The next stage of the work — the replacing of the old priming by a new 
ground — requires special skill and a thorough knowledge of the structure of 
paintings of all schools. The new ground must have exactly the same optical 
properties as the original priming, identical in colour or whiteness. In this 
connection, allowance should be made for the darkening of the picture with age 
when re-establishing the original tone of the priming. Moreover, the new 
ground should, as nearly as possible, have the same reflecting (or refractive) 
power, that is to say, it should be just as dull or as shiny as the original priming. 

This new priming can rarely be applied in one layer but has to be carefully 
and progressively built up. If it is possible to make it more inert, more elastic 
and more adhesive than the old priming, without appreciably altering the optical 
effect, the result will be all the more satisfactory. As a rule, it is preferable to 
use a mixture containing casein. If necessary, a piece of muslin may be inserted 
before the new ground is applied. 

The composition, preparation and application of the priming demand quite 
a special technique, a detailed description of which would go beyond the limits 
of this study. Indeed, to carry out this operation successfully, it is necessary, 
in each individual case, to conform to the technique of the painting to be treated, 
and reference should be made to the works dealing with the craft of the old 
masters. 

Adhesives. 

223. — In some cases, a special adhesive, such as a lining mixture, can be Ironed 
Into the paint layer from behind, when the paint layer has been rid of the pri- 
ming; if this method Is adopted, an intermediate coating of size or emulsion 
must be applied to ensure perfect adhesion between the paint layer and the 
ground. 

Similarly, it will, in some instances, be necessary to apply a separate coat of 
size or some other adhesive to the new support before this is laid and pressed 
on to the priming. * 

Pressing must, in most cases, be done with the aid of slabs of slate or metal 
plates and nearly always at a certain temperature; very often arrangements must 
be made to raise the temperature at the front of the painting as well as the back 
of the new support. The temperature of these slabs or plates is of primary 
importance for the success of the whole operation. 


231 


T HE C 0 N S E R VATION OF PAINTINGS 



Remo¥al of the 


Surface ProteetioHo 


224® — When all the layers of priming and adhesive are thoroughly dry, the 
picture may be laid face upwards and the surface protection reinoved in the 
manner described in the section on relining. 


232 





CHAPTER XVI I 

MALADIES AND TREATMENT OF WOODEN SUPPORTS j 

A. - DESTRUCTION OF WOOD PARASITES. i 

It is necessary to consider the two main types of attack: insect attack and j 

fungoid attacks and as these require to be dealt with very differently, the import-' j 

ance of correct diagnosis, will be obvious. 

Insect Attack* l 

225 * — Insect attack leads to the formation of tunnels, galleries and round 
holes like shot-holes and, by tapping the surface, clean pulverised wood may 
be extracted which is the material that has been excreted by the insects. The 
particles of this powder are generally of rounded shape, rather difficult to distin- 
guish macroscopically from insect eggs. The wood is usually very dry. j 

Fungoid Attack 

226* — Fungoid growths are to be looked for especially along joints in the 
wood to which water may at one time have had access. In advanced cases of 
so-called ‘‘dry rot”, the wood becomes soft and spongy and cracks may appear 
across the grain; the wood may be either damp or quite dry and often the surface 
is quite sound whilst the underlying wood is shrunk and decayed. The condi- 
tion of the wood can be tested by pressing gently on the painted surface and 
tapping with a knife. . . . j 

Insect attack is treated by fumigation, the holes being stopped afterwards 
if so desired. Fungoid attack, in its advanced condition at least, requires a 
major operation, namely the removal of all decayed wood and the only alter- | 

native is the transference of the painting to another panel or canvas. j 

(See Transfer,) j 

Tireatment of Woirm-eateii Panels. | 

227® — Of the many sterilising agents which are available, the best are gases j 

or liquids having a high vapour pressure and thus able to penetrate easily to 


233 


T H E. C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N OF PAIN T IN G S 


I the depths of the insect-holes. The primary consideration is to determine 

j what substances can be used without damaging the various materials employed 

in the preparation of the priming and paint. 

The following are considered dangerous, that Is, they either cause immediate 
damage or may. In time, be deleterious and should never be employed: all acids 
and alkalis and aqueous solutions of whatever nature; halogen-containing 
compounds, . organic or inorganic, such as carbon tetrachloride or dichloro'- 
benzene; all solvents for oil and varnish and agents which may cause paint to 
soften, such as thymol. Hydrogen cyanide gas has been used effectively against 
attacks by wood- beetles, but it is a virulent poison and should be employed 
only by a qualified specialist. 

The results obtained with carbon-monoxide have proved disappointing. 
Carbon-disulphide, a highly volatile liquid, has been found a very effective 
fumigant, convenient in use and without any apparent action on painting mate- 
rials when the following precautions are observed: 

Pure carbon-disulphide only must be employed. — The substance must 
be fresh. It should be kept in a cool place, away from sunlight, in a ruby glass 
bottle. — As It is highly inflammable, it must be used only where there are no 
naked lights and smoking must be prohibited in any rooms where carbon- 
disulphide vapour is present 


Fiimigatioii by CarboB-disulphide* ; / 

228. — A panel should be fumigated as soon as convenient after the discovery 
of evidence of active insect life. A large box, about 2 feet high, constructed 
of deal, about I inch thick, is lined with sheets of varnished paper or in some 
other way to render it airtight A board of similar wood acts as a lid which 
may be slid off as required; the lid should be lined in the same manner as the 
box and if a strip of thin felt is glued along the edge of the box the weight of 
the lid upon it will form a joint which is sufficiently gas-tight The painted 
panel, frame, etc. to be fumigated are supported, face upwards, inside the box, 
say 4 inches from the bottom, and saucers of carbon-disulphide are placed 
inside the box, beneath the object to be fumigated. The lid is immediately 
replaced. 

The total quantity of carbon-disulphide must not be less than 1 ounce per 
cubic foot capacity. The vapour soon saturates the air in the box and enters 
the pores of the wood. 



234 





f. A fVAAA' ■'} 


62 . PANEL WITH THE BACK SAWN OFF AND THE OUTER SURFACE OF WHICH SHOWED NO 
SIGNS OF DETERIORATION: INSECTS HAD BORED THEIR WAY IN FROM THE EDGES. 


T HE C 0 N S E R V A TION OF PAINTINGS 


After the lapse of four days, the lid is removed and the saucers replenished 
with a similar quantity of insecticide. The lid is replaced and kept in position 
for at least a fortnight. By this means, all grubs and full-grown insects are | 

destroyed, but not necessarily all eggs, although such treatment is often suffi- 
cient to effect a permanent cure. It is obvious that a fumigated panel must be 
scrutinised later on during the vulnerable period when the eggs are commonly 
hatched out, in order to ensure that no life persists; some knowledge of the life- | 

history of the parasite is therefore necessary. _ ; 

In the case of the ordinary furniture beetle, which is the chief offender, this - i 

inspection and any further fumigation which may be necessary should take j 

place in May or August. After fumigation of a panel, it is advisable to fill i 

the “worm” -holes with wax, as this facilitates subsequent examination. 





B. - REPAIRS, CONSOLIDATION, TRANSFER 


** Movement of Wood® 

229® — Of the various materials used as supports for paintings, wood is the 
most susceptible to atmospheric influences. The general rules of conservation 
should therefore be strictly observed when one is dealing with works executed 

It must be remembered, however, that even under ^ the most iavourable 
conditions a wooden panel is never inert, that is to say, it is continually ^pand- 
ing or contracting according to the degree of atmospheric humidity. Healthy 
panels, therefore, are also constantly subject to deteriorations of the paint layer 
on account of the variations that take place in this surrounding atmosphere. 
Consequently, paintings executed on wood should, in particular, be kept under 

constant observation. , -r i i 

When considering the various forms of deterioration that manifest themselves, 
one must first of all ascertain whether they are in the acute stage and caused by 
temporary influences, or whether they are of a chronic nature and due to 
permanent causes. According as the deterioration falls within the first or the 
second category, steps should be taken to eliminate the external or internal 
influences, as well as the symptoms, or, by resorting to more thorough treatment, 
the diseases which are Inherent in the wood properly so called. _ 

In this connection, the following fundamental rule is of capital importance: 
the free movement of the wood, which exerts itself across the gram, must not be 
hampered. 

I. — Large cracks, crevices. — Cross-battening. 

Causes of these deteriorations. 

230 . — Cracks and crevices, which must not be confused with crackles, may 
appear in the form of fissures which follow a straight line from one edge of the 
panel to the other. Such cases are almost invariably due to the breaking o 

^'^An accident of this kind may be caused by the fact that, owing to mildew, 
for example, the glue has lost its adhesive power. There may, however, be 
additional causes : the wood adjacent to the joint may have rotted or have become 


237 


T H E :c 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N 


PA I N'T IN G S 


wdrm'-eaten; again,, as the result of inappropriate treatment, the uniform move- 
ment of the wood may have been arrested. This latter phenomenon may be 
due to the addition of battening, to an over rigid fixing of the panel within 
its frame, etc. 

Wavy cracks and crevices which do not spread right across a panel are. 
frequently due to a wrong choice of wood; less often to the uneven planing of 
the surface, but nearly always to the injudicious addition of new elements, 
such as cross-battens glued to the back, the introduction of dovetailed joints, 
the wedging of cross-battens, etc. This latter point is dealt with in greater 
detail in the section on cradling (§ 235). 


Preventive measures^ 

23L — As already stated, the direct fixing of any new part across the grain 
of the wood must be avoided. This fundamental principle may be supple- 
mented by the rule that parts added and fixed in the direction of the grain must 
never be in a wood harder than that of the original panel. 

Remedies. 

232. — Whatever may be the defect that has developed, the operations con- 
templated should be entrusted only to specialists. 

First of all, immediate steps should be taken to remove all the parts that have 
been added by injudicious and thoughtless treatment. 

Before sticking the broken joints together, it may be necessary to harden the 
adjacent portions that have rotted by applying a coat of thin glue. This ope- 
ration, however, needs to be very carefully carried out in order not to dissolve 
the priming. There is another danger to be guarded against; when, in the 
process of drying, the glue penetrates to the paint layer, the latter may sink 
into the galleries eaten away by insects and these areas of the picture will be 
marked by small depressions. 

The next step is to stick strips of canvas along the crevice, or thin laths of 
wood, in the direction of the grain. 

Cradling may be necessary to prevent a recurrence of this type of deterio- 
...ration. : 

In extreme cases, the use of plywood boards has proved successful. (This 
operation is explained in §§ 216-224.) 


238 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 

IL Warping. 

Causes* 

233. — This form of deterioration is caused by the natural drying of the 
wood; distortion is more pronounced at the back than at the front of a picture^, 
as the paint layer restrains the drying of the panel. 

Remedies* 

234. — A warped or distorted panel may be treated by applying a coat of 
good quality copal varnish to the back, edges and front. This should be under*- 
taken only when the moisture content of the wood is at its minimum, for example 
in prolonged periods of cold weather and in a room that has been warmed for 
some time. Sizing, or the application of a piece of fabric or other material stuck 
to the frame and covering the back of the panel, is scarcely effective. The 
edges are sometimes protected by strips of adhesive tape. 

Impregnation by various substances has, so far, not proved satisfactory. 
These substances also often alter the reflective qualities of the gesso priming 
when they penetrate to that depth, besides darkening^ the picture; in many 
cases the alteration in appearance develops unevenly in the form of darker 
patches. 

The remedy consists in subjecting the panel, with all due precaution, to the 
action of moist air; the result obtained, however, is rarely permanent. Recourse 
should therefore be had to cradling and, in extreme cases, to the use of plywood 
or to a transfer operation. 

Generally speaking, one should never attempt to straighten a distorted panel 
by forcible means; such treatment is apt to break it entirely or, at any rate, to 
crack the paint layer. 

Cradling. 

235. — Cradling or cross-battening will correct only the curvature or warping 
of a panel; the operation may be a remedy for blistering only in so far as the 
blisters are caused by the curving of the panel, which is seldom the case (see 
Chapter XIII for the treatment of blistering). 

Cross-battening has long been regarded as the sole effective remedy for the 
distortion of wood panels, and even for other kinds of deterioration to which 


F 


THE CO NS ERVATION OF PAINTINGS 

this type of painting is exposed. The method consists in fixing, to the back of 
the pane!, a series of vertical battens equally spaced, over which are placed a 
similar series of horizontal battens. Needless to say, this framing can have 
no effect on the distortion of the panel or on the phenomena resultiiig therefrom. 
Moreover, if this system of battening is adapted to the panel without taking 
certain precautions to meet the * ^ movement ’ ’ of the wood, further deterio- 
rations — sometimes more serious than those which it is sought to remedy- 
will develop, chiefly in the direction of the battens running parallel to the grain. 
We think it advisable, therefore, to go more into the details and application of 
this method. 

It may be pointed out, incidentally, that the vertical battens can, in many 
cases, serve also for repairing the cracks or crevices of the panel. 

The reinforcing battens placed across the grain of the wood should always 
be free in relation to the vertical battens. The surfaces of the battens in 
contact one with the other and with the panel should be rubbed over with 
graphite to prevent any seizing and to allow free play of all the parts of the 
framing as the. wood expands or contracts. The horizontal battens must, at 
no point, be fixed to the panel, otherwise there is a danger that the pane! will 
split. If the tendency of the panel to shrink is stronger than its resistance, the 
mere jamming of the transverse battens may be sufficient to cause damage 
(crevices, splitting). It is often necessary to reduce the thickness of the panel, 
by appropriate planing, In order to diminish Its tendency to shrink. In no 
case, however, must the panel be weakened to such an extent as to expose it 
to the risk of splitting. 

Disadvantages of Cradling. 

236. — It frequently happens that panels which are too thin or too weak, 
or which have a natural tendency to develop crevices, break after having been 
cradled. Accidents of this kind occur not only as a result of the jamnilng of 
the cross-battens, but also because the longitudinal battens— especially if they 
are made from wood that is not sufficiently seasoned or too dry— exert a strain, 
as they dry, on that part of the panel to which they are glued, causing it to 
Separate from the adjoining parts that are not reinforced with battens. Another 
drawback of cradling is that the longitudinal battens, particularly if they 
are applied to a thin panel, cause deep undulations to form on the front sur- 
face. 


240 



CRABLING WITH BATTENS FLAT CRABLING WITH BATTENS ON EDGE 




T H E C 0 N S E R V A T I 0 N 0 F P A I NT I N G S 


Advantages of Cradling assembled on edge. 

237. _ The disadvantages referred to above are larply attenuated by cradling 
assembled on edge; this method is more effective in counteracting shrinkage 
and covers a smaller area of the original back of the panel. The principle 
underlying this new method of cradling consists in the use of a smaller quantity 
of new wood and in taking the maximum advantage of the resistance offered 
by the battens to the warping and distortion of the original panel. Instead 
of laying the battens flat, they are placed on edge; the cradling assembled in 
this way is infinitely narrower and lighter, while, from the point of view of 
efficiency, its resistance is very considerably increased, as will be seen from the 
following figures: 

1) A batten 8x20 mm. in section, on edge, has a resistance 35% greater 
than that of a batten of the same thickness but twice as wide, laid flat. 

2) When they are of the same sectional dimensions, the batten laid on edge 
is two and a half times more effective than a batten laid flat. Thus, sixteen 
battens laid flat can be replaced by ten of the same dimensions but placed on 
edge. 

3) To obtain the same resistance to warping with the same quantity of wood, 
only 25% of the panel need be covered by battens placed on edge, as compared 
with 62 % if the battens are laid flat. The area of the back of the original panel 
which remains visible when this new method is adopted is therefore much 
greater; this advantage is particularly important where the back of the panel 
bears Inscriptions or seals. 


Pireeautions and choice of material. 

238. — A few general observations should here be added regarding the ope- 
rations described above. The glueing of a thick board to the back of a panel 
is dangerous, even if it follows the grain, for owing to the different coefficients 
of expansion of the old and the new wood, cracks frequently develop in the 

°”The new elements should always be of the same material as the old panel, 
and preferably softer. It is dangerous to glue the frames, as this is likely to 

cause fissures in the panel. i r-,. i \ 

Adhesive : The best adhesive is still ]oiner s glue (skin glue or rabbit glue), 
since its coefficient of expansion approximates the closest to that of the wood. 







242 



Ill Blisters, flaking of the faint and ground. Plywood and Transfer, 


Causes* 

238* — The causes of these deteriorations — the most frequently met with 
in paintings executed on wood — ^are generally: drying and shrinkage of the 
panel; excessive movement of the wood due to heat, continuous ' draught, /or 
to rot, Insect attack, etc. Sometimes, cavities appear beneath the priming, 
where insects have eaten channels' away along the surface of the wood. , (See 
also the chapter on damage to the ground layer). 


Preventive measures* 

240® — The preventive measures and remedies are the same as those indicated 
in §§ 233-236 and are subject to the same reservations. It should, moreover, 
be pointed out that the use of impregnation substances — which are practically 
ineffective — ^is dangerous for two reasons: I) The diluent (vehicle) of hardening 
substances may dissolve or destroy the priming and the paint layer; this is 
chiefly true of size and cellulose; 2) The impregnation substance, if it reaches 
the priming, will affect its reflective properties. The result will be a darkening 
of the picture; in the areas where the substance comes into contact with material 
that has been rendered more permeable as the result of insect attack or some 
other deterioration, dark patches may develop. Lastly, the actual composition 
of the impregnating substance—acids, etc. — can cause damage. 

It is accordingly advisable to avoid all substances containing oil; in this respect, 
waxes and resins are less harmful, while size and cellulose are the most harmless. 

Impregnation with, or the application of, one or other of these substances 
can improve a painting, to a certain extent, only in mild cases of blistering due 
to the shrinking of the wood, but in extreme cases, treatment of this kind is 
of no real value. 


Treatmeiit® ' / 

241®: - There are three different methods of treatment that can be employed 
according to the type of deterioration and the condition of the panel: 

1) Action on the symptoms themselves (see Chapter XIII on the treatment 
of the paint layer). 

2) Treatment of the causes inherent in the wood; we have already referred 


the conservation of pain tings 

to the means suggested for hardening wood and the dangers attending the 

adoption of such methods. 

3) Radical elimination of all the causes of deterioration inherent m the^ wood, 
both those enumerated above and any other agent favourable to the disinte- 
gration of a panel and, hence, of the priming and paint layer. There are various 
means whereby these factors of deterioration can be eliminated. 

Plywood. 

242. — If the priming can still be saved, the panel can be backed with plywood. 
The operation consists in reducing the thickness of the onginal panel to, say, 

1 or 2 mm. (according to the strength of the wood), which in most cases can be 
retained, and in replacing the portion of the panel thus removed by a sheet 

of plywood. 

Precautions. 

243. _ The application of a plywood backing should not be resorted to unless 
every other remedy would be unsuccessful; moreover, the work should be 
entrusted only to experts specialising in this kind of treatment, for the choice 
of materials as well as the manner in which the operation is earned out, as will 
be seen later, is the condition sine qua non on which the success and permanent 
effect of the work depend. Compared with the method involving a complete 
transfer, this process has the great advantage of saving the priming, m so tar 
as this is still Intact, by retaining a thin layer of the original wood. _ Again, 
this thin layer makes it possible to reach the priming from the back, m cases 
where it needs consolidating, and also to restore its adhesive power; this ope- 
ration is effected by impregnation with a suitable substance such as thin size. 

Principle of the Process* 

245. _ The use of plywood, a comparatively recent innovation in the restor- 
ation of panel pictures, has been current for some time in cabinet-making and 
building construction. It dates from the time when mechanical tools became 
available for the production of wooden boards, of the required thinness but ot 
fairly big dimensions, that could be assembled in several layers, the gram ot 
each layer running at right angles to that of the adjoining layers. 

The art of using plywood (which was evolved from veneering, known to the 


244 


THE CONSERVATION OF PA INT! N G S 

Egyptians and very commonly practised in the XVI I Ith century) is governed 
by two essential factors: the nature of the wood employed and the thickness ot 
the sheets. We do not propose to discuss the technique of the assembling ot 
these sheets in this manual, but it may be mentioned that firms specialising in 
this branch of manufacture have succeeded in perfecting the process to such 
an extent that they can now produce a material beyond reproach for the type o 
work with which we are here concerned. We shall therefore confine ourselves 

to describing the principle of the process. ,-i 

When two pieces of wood of the same kind and of a certain thicknps are 

assembled in such a way that the grain of each runs in the same direction, an 
excellent and lasting joint is obtained, since the two panels expand and contract 
also in the same direction and according to the same potential— this movement 
being practically negligible longitudinally but very pronounced transversally. 
But this does not prevent warping and distortion, which are inherent in a pane 
made from one piece of wood. If, on the other hand, these two panels are 
stuck together, with the grain at right aiigles, cleavage is bound to occur after 
a while, for the two parts are straining in opposite directions, these forces, 
however, will be strong or weak according to the thickness or thinness of the 
wood. There is, therefore, a thickness below which the force exerted by the 
wood is no longer sufficient to break the joint; this is the principle underlying 
the manufacture of plywood. The layers are stuck one to the other, in odd 
numbers (generally 3 or 5) and In such a way that the grain is alternately longi- 
tudinal and transversal. The hygrometric properties of these layers remain 
the same, but the composite panel thus formed undergoes no change m length 
or breadth, as the crossed fibres of the different sheets are held together by t e 
adhesive. Longitudinally, the grain is so strong and stable that it completely 
counteracts any expansion or contraction of the adjacent gram breadthwise. 

IirreveirsiWe Contiraction of Wood. 

246. — The question arises whether it is desirable to use a rigid material as a 
support for an old panel consisting of a single piece of wood. From the scien- 
tific standpoint, it is obvious that all hygroscopic materials continue to move , 
whatever their nature and age may be. It has been observed, however, that 
wood, after shrinking fairly considerably after the felling of the tre^, continues 
to expand and to contract according to the hygrometric variations ot the sur- 
rounding atmosphere. Nevertheless, wood is subject to another movement 


245 



of distortion, whicli is continuous and exerted in the same direction, napely, 
the so-called irreversible contraction of wood. Certain indications go. to prove 
that old wood panels have decreased in size, transversally in relation to the 
grain; for example, a circular panel will, with age, assume a shape approaching 
an ellipse, owing to the decrease in the diameter at right angles to the grain. 
Such a panel can be exposed to the action of moist air, but it will never resume 
its original circular shape: the contraction is permanent. — This phenomenon 
is confirmed by another observation that has been made: the painted surface 
of old panels often show the grain of the wood, which appears in relief through 
the paint layer. The surface of these panels must originally have been perfectly 
smooth and uniform. A more searching examination will reveal that it is the 
cells developed during the autumn growth — harder, smaller and with thick 
walls — which form the raised parts of the grain, while the intermediate depres- 
sions are formed by the cells produced in the spring — softer, bigger and with 
thin walls — which have shrunk and are therefore at a lower level. This 
contraction, which is here visible in the thickness of the wood, also occurs 
breadthwise, as proved by the phenomenon described above. 

Scientific observations have been made of the duration of this irreversible 
contraction, according to the nature of the wood and the surroundings in w^hich 
it was placed; experiments have also been carried out, from this same standpoint, 
in the artificial desiccation of wood. It will be sufficient, however, to have 
drawn attention to this peculiarity in order to stress the decisive part It plays 
in the rational treatment of wood used as a support for paintings. 


Equilibrium of forces in the plywood and the panel, 

247, — It is necessary to say a few words more before passing on to the tech- 
nique of the process of restoration by means of plywood: the layers are assembled 
in such a way that each relies, for stability, on an intermediate layer, reciprocally 
in equilibrium, according to a symmetrical arrangement. Superimposing the 
whole of the original panel would introduce a new element that would break 
this symmetry and the resulting reaction would be the warping of the panel. 
The panel must, therefore, be regarded as a constituent part of the plywood 
and its strength must be equilibrated with that of one of the elements of the new 
backing. But, as we have already seen, the wood’s firmness and tendency 
to ‘‘move” have decreased to a certain extent — with age and according to its 
nature and state of preservation; in the majority of cases, therefore, a thickness 


246 


T HE 


CON S E R V A T 1 0 N OF PA INTI N G_ j 

of from 3 to 5 mm. will be sufficient, which \^ould correspond to the strength 
of a sheet of plywood 1 to 1.5 mm. thick. 


Operation. 

248. — When planing down the back of the panel, all the necessary care 
should be taken to ensure that the paint layer and the priming are neither 
shaken nor subjected to any pressure likely to cause damage. 1 he plywoo 
back is applied when the desired thickness has been obtained, unless the condi- 
tion of the panel necessitates previous treatment by impregnation. During 
these intermediate operations, the panel-reduced and weakened-should be 
supported to prevent distortion. The plywood paneT should be fixed wi 
one or other of the adhesives recommended in the section dealing with crad- 

^^^The observations made in the various museums exhibiting panel paintings 
treated in this way point to the conclusion that this process constitutes a radical 
remedy for the most serious forms of deterioration to which these paintings are 
liable. But these results are satisfactory only in so far as the new material 
consists of judiciously selected woods that lend themselves to cutting up into 
thin sheets; where these sheets have been seasoned in conformity with appro- 
priate methods and assembled in such a manner as to ensure their perfect 
cohesion, and where the material has been selected according to the nature o 
the wood from which the original panel -was cut. The technique of the fixing o 
the new support also requires long practical experience of this special branch ot 
the cabinet-maker’s art. It is clear, therefore, that the neglecting of one or 
other of these precautions is apt to lead to accidents of the gravest charader. 

One of the principal objections raised against the use of plywood backings 
is that the original back of the panel is lost. Apart, however, from the fact 
that, in some instances, this operation is the sole means of saving works that 
have reached a certain degree of deterioration, it must be pointed out that the 
thickness of the old wood removed can often be stuck on to the new plywood 
backing. The old back may, indeed, bear inscriptions, rnarks or signs which 
it is advisable to preserve if it is thought that photographic records, which are 
always to be recommended in such cases, would not be sufficient. Moreover, 
curators have long been accustomed to the concealrnent of the original backs 
of old canvases, most of which have by now been relined. 


247 





THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


Transfer. (See also Chapter XV.) | 

' ' ' 'l 

249® — The transfer properly so called of the paint layer and the replacement • 

of the gesso priming should be envisaged only when the priming has deterio- 
rated and disintegrated to such an extent that no other remedy can save it. 

The transfer of the painting to a new panel cut from the solid is not to be 
recommended, for this new element would, sooner or later, be subject to the ; 

same deteriorations as the original wood. The fairly recent method of transfer- 
ring a painting to composition boards has proved satisfactory. j 

Generally, the transfer of a painting executed on wood to a new canvas support j 

is scarcely satisfactory, since the original character of the work is thereby altered. 

Such an operation should be undertaken only in extreme cases, when a plywood 
expert is not available. In fact, plywood is, for the time being, the only material 
that will give satisfactory results for the transfer of panel paintings. ’ 

Throughout all these operations, care must be taken to ensure that the light ^ 

tone and the cohesion of the priming are In no way changed. 

Operation. ^ 

250. — The actual method of transfer (described in detail in Chapter XV) 

calls for certain preliminary precautions of paramount Importance. Afte ; 

carefully determining the composition of the paint layer, a protective sheet f 

should be laid over it, composed of a substance sufficiently transparent to permit 

of a constant inspection of the layer during the operation. For this purpose, 

a sheet of transparent Japanese paper may be used, stuck on to the paint layer 

with starch glue, if the paint is not sensitive to water. Otherwise, and even 

in any case, for safety’s sake, the paint layer may be Isolated by a coat of varnish. 

Successful use has also been made of strips of transparent adhesive film (rubber 
adhesive) similar to the transparent tape used for surgical dressings; these 
strips should not, however, be left on the paint for more than a week; neither 
should they be allowed to dry, as they shrink in the process. It is also possible 
to use resin adhesives, as for relining (see Chapter XV, §§199 et seq.) 

IV. Other Deteriorations 

Dark Streaks. 

251. — The appearance of dark streaks on the surface of a picture, parallel 
to the grain of the wood panel, is often due to the penetration of resinous or 





248 


T' H, E "C ,0 N S E R V. A T I 0 -N 0 F.' P A . I N. T .l.'N, .G....S 


acid elemeBts exuded from the pores of the wood through the priming, ^ This 
generally occurs because the priming has failed to afford adequate protection. 
There is scarcely any effective remedy against this form of deterioration; 
there are several famous paintings in which, not dark streaks, but actual resin 
appears at regular intervals, according to the hygrometric conditions prevailing 
in the gallery. As a rule, all that is done is to remove the resin, to prevent it 
from damaging the adjoining areas of the painting. 

According to circumstances, consideration may be given to adopting the 
radical remedy of transferring the picture in its entirety, with a complete renewal 
of the priming. ' ' ■ ' 

Local and accidental deterioration. 

252. — Accidental damage — knocks, scratches, etc. — does not admit of 
universally appropriate treatment. Holes can be filled with wood paste, 
composed of very fine sawdust mixed with cellulose. (See above for the treat-- 
ment of deterioration of this kind.) 

Insect attack, mould, etc. 

— (See Part A of this chapter.) 


CHAPTER XVII 


OTHER SUPPORTS 


Besides wood and canvas, the conservator occasionally meets with paintings 
on supports consisting of parchment, paper, various composition boards, metal, 
stone and plaster. It will suffice here to outline the chief characteristics of 
each. The International Museums Office will, in due course, publish articles 
relating to paper supports (prints, drawings, manuscripts, etc.), and to mural 
painting which Involves the study of plaster and mortar. (For these two types 
of support, see the appended Bibliography for references to the articles which 
have already appeared in Mottseion.) 

Parchment. 

253. — Parchment is made of the skins of animals by removing the hair and 
preparing the surface by abrasives until it is smooth and in a suitable condition 
for painting. When wetted, parchment expands and becomes soft and flexible; 
it shrinks very considerably on drying. The effect of moisture on parchment 
is to make it cockle and there is no way of removing the folds in the material 
without softening again with water and stretching uniformly. 

Paper. 

254. — Paper is made of vegetable fibres which have been thoroughly disinte- 
grated and matted together to form a sheet. Even the best papers which are 
made from cotton and linen rags are not so strong as parchment, but they do 
not stretch when wetted to the same extent as parchment and have less tendency 
to cockle. The strength of paper depends on the length and quality of the 
fibres and on the excellence of the sizing. Glue size is added to paper in the 
process of manufacture to prevent the colour from running into the tissue as it 
would in blotting-paper. 






T H. E C 0 N S E R V A T rO- N 


P A I N'T I N G S 


Coiiser¥atioii of Parchment and Paper* 

255® — In additloe to a marked tendency to deteriorate under the influeiiGe 
of excessive moisture^ both parchment and paper are susceptible to attack by 
moulds and bacteria which weaken the ground and cause staining. 

Both materials may be sterilised by exposing them in a chamber for some 
hours to the vapours emitted by molten thymol; this treatment softens oil paint 
and varnish but causes no change in watercolour, tempera, miniature (gum) 
painting or in manuscript matter. . 

Excessive , heating must be avoided in the care of parchment, vellum, etc., 

because it causes desiccation and embrittlement. 

When paper has been attacked by mould, the size Is destroyed and the sub- 
stance weakened; in such cases, sterilisation in itself is insufficient as a method 
of restoration. The mould growths must be picked off carefully with a brush, 
after having been moistened, if necessary, with alcohol, and strength restored 
to the film by re-sizing with clear gelatine solution (1 sheet in a quart of water). 
(See the methodical study on the Preservation of Prints, Drawings and Manu- 
scripts, by H. J. Plenderlelth, in Mouseion, Vol. 29-30, pp. 81-104, and VoL 
33-34, pp. 199-226.) 

Cardboard. 

256« — The many types of cardboard are made by pasting laminated sheets 
of paper together, sometimes with a layer of paper-pulp incorporated. These 
boards are subject to the same forms of decay as paper itself; they contain, 
however, a high proportion of glue, generally of inferior quality, and this glue, 
in adverse circumstances, is very noxious because of its nutrient properties for 
micro-organisms. Cardboard is softened by moisture and very easily attacked 
by fungus, so that a painting may suffer as a result of the intensive decay of 
the support. In such cases, it may be easier to soften with water and to remove 
all excess of paper from the back and then to clean and remount the painting 
on a card of good quality (or on plywood) than to attempt restoration of the 
original support. 

Plywood. 

2S7. — Plywood, if chosen with care, forms an excellent support for painting. 
Since each ply of wood is cut around the trunk of the tree and not longitudinally 



as in the manufacture of planks, it is important that the surface of the plywood 
should corresponds to the external surface of the ply as cut from the tree; other- 
wise, there is a tendency for small cracks to appear when the thin sheet is flattened 
out. Before painting, therefore, the surface of a plywood panel should always 
be examined to make sure that there are no such cracks and any wood which 
does not conform to the specification recommended should be discarded. 
(For further details, see the sections concerning plywood, etc. in Chapter XVI, 
§§ 242 et seq.) 


MetaL 

259, — Metal is sometimes used as a ground for paintings, e.g.: copper, iron 
and zinc, and, more recently, aluminium. The principal feature of the metal 
ground is its easy conduction of heat and cold, which cause the paint-layer 
to be subject to more persistent and continuous changes in this respect. Metal 
panels should, therefore, be hung in positions which are not exposed to heat 
or to draughts of air, otherwise flaking of the paint is to be expected. 

Corrosion may play an important part in the stability of the picture. It is 
caused by the metal’s undergoing chemical action with some acid, alkali or salt. 
It may be arrested by washing with water, if this Is possible, or, if not, by a 
salve of wax dissolved in turpentine, a little wax being left on the surface in 
order to localise the effect of any corrosive matter that may remain. 


252 


THE CO N S E R . V A T I Q N OF PAINTINGS 


porous stones are likewise perfectly stable as painting grounds, and if 
tends to flake from such materials this is probably due to the desiccation of the 
ground and the comparative absence of keying^ to the stone. Paint lasts well 
on marble when not exposed to outside weathering. The same cannot be said, 
however, of paintings on the more porous stones (sandstone and^ limestone) 
as these will always take some time to reach equilibrium conditions in, the 

gallery. ■ • ^ . 

It may require a considerable amount of time for the water m the stone to 
dry out and, in the meantime, the paint may exhibit; a tendency to flake away 
from the surface. The only steps that one can take are to keep ^the back of 

the stone free to “breathe”, i.e., it should in no circumstances be impregnated 
with varnish or enclosed in a frame. In this way, the moisture is encouraged 
to evaporate from the back rather than through the paint layer. 

When salts are present in porous stone, as is usually the case with stones that 
have been excavated, the problem becomes more difficult, as the salts tend to 
be drawn towards the more porous surface, where there is greatest evaporation. 
Crystallisation may take place which will cause flaking or a powdery form of 
disintegration. In such cases, the problem is more in the province of the restorer 
of antiquities than in that of the conservator of paintings. 


Frescoes on show in museums. 


201, — The most delicate period in the life of a fresco that has been removed 
to a picture gallery is during the time immediately following its introduction 
into the collection — the time during which it is becoming acclimatised to the 
new conditions of temperature and humidity. And here, once more, the general 
principle is illustrated that a gradual change to new conditions is likely to do 
much less harm than one which is abrupt and which is carried out without due 
foresight and consideration for the facts. A transferred fresco which has been 
consolidated with plaster should never be immediately framed and exhibited 
in the gallery; on no account should it be built Into the structure of the building. 
It should be freely exposed in a cool part of the studio so that drying takes 
slowly until the condition of equilibrium is reached. A test may be made of 
the residual moisture by holding a sheet of clear gelatine against the surface 
with a strip of adhesive tape and observing whether there is any cockling in the 

^^ifthe fresco is to be framed, whether glazed or not, it should never be entirely 


253 


*:■ ‘ ii 

IH 


i‘;v« ■ 




iir 


■ ; . 

!''■■ ■: 

'f ® 


T:H/.'E ■■'■/C S E. RvV A"T 10 N 


''F 'A I M' T G S 


enclosed in- a box. ' The back should be adequately supported by cross battens, 
of wood and a piece of raw cloth (unprimed) stretched over them to' exclude dust 
and insects. Green ‘‘ Willesden canvas” may be used for this purposcj or the 
fabric may -be/ made proof against moths and other parasites by painting 'it 
with a solution of copper naphthenate in paraffin oil When a fresco has been 
transferred to canvas it is much thinner and the question of drying out is not 
of the same urgency. In such cases, it is important to ensure that the canvas 
is not' allowed to become too tight on the stretcher, because the fresco ground 
is in no sense flexible and would be torn, with consequent flaking of the paint. 

The general problem of the conservation and restoration of mural paintings 
was dealt with in a special study published in VoL 39-40 of Mouseion, In this 
chapter, therefore, we . have confined ourselves to giving a few elementary 
recommendations for the guidance of conservators who have frescoes in their 
collections. 




APPENDICES 


PRACTICAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
TABLE OF COLOURS 
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 
ALPHABETICAL INDEX 


The practical recommendations given in this section of the manual merely state 
the elementary precautions with which a museum staff responsible for the consef’^ 
vation of collections of works of art should he familiar. They should therefore he 
regarded not as the conclusion to this volume but as a note that can be consulted by 
a museum staff and even by the general public, in whatever form the curator may 
consider most appropriate. 

As regards the BIBLIOGRAPHICAL REFERENCES, we wish to point out that they are 
confined to the works so far published by the International Museums Office. We 
are, of course, fully aware that extremely Valuable studies have appeared elsewhere 
on the subject of preserving and restoring works of art, and if we have limited our 
enumeration to articles published in the review Mouseion it is because we were 
thus certain of placing at the reader s disposal documentary material that would 
be easily accessible. If , moreover. We had extended our bibliography to the whole 
of this literature, we should have been obliged not only to make what might have 
been an arbitrary selection, but also to amplify our references to such an extent that 
they would have been less practical for the purposes of consultation. Such a method 
would, in fact, have been contrary to the spirit of this manual, which is intended 
only as a guide. Lastly, although the basic studies that have been published 
elsewhere are not mentioned in this appendix, they are amply cited in the various, 
articles referred to in our bibliography. 

In any case, it is still our intention to compile a comprehensive bibliography on. 
the subject at a later date. 


The deterioration to which paintings are subject may be attributed not only 
to the natural changes which occur in the course of time or as the result of 
organic defects in the materials employed, but also, in some instances, to careless 
treatment and handling and, more particularly, to certain reactions caused by 
surrounding conditions. 

The different component parts of a picture (support, priming, the paint layer 
and the protective coating of varnish) are, in fact, extremely sensitive to varia- 
tions in temperature and atmospheric humidity. 

In the case of pictures painted on wood, it is common knowledge that moisture 
causes the panel to expand, while a dry atmosphere causes it to contract. For 
canvases, this phenomenon is reversed. Since, however, the paint layer is 
less elastic than the support, it is unable to adapt itself to these variations and 
consequently cracks and frequently becomes separated from the panel or canvas 
as the case may be. 

It sometimes happens that, under the influence of hygrometric factors, the 
size used in the preparation of the priming loses its adhesive power, with the 
result that the paint layer becomes detached, blisters and flakes. 

Very often, these risks of deterioration can be reduced by a good protective 
coating and favourable atmospheric conditions. As soon as the first symptoms 
of deterioration appear, and these are easily detected if a careful and constant 
watch is kept over the picture, it is indispensable that the advice of a technical 
expert attached to the science laboratory of a big museum should be sought and 
every possible guarantee obtained before entrusting the defective painting to 
a restorer. Such precautions and guarantees are necessary both in the case 
of a merely superficial cleaning of the picture and in operations of a more serious 
nature such as the removal of varnish or alterations to the support. 

In practice, these general principles may be set forth in the following order: 

(*) Circular issued by the International Museums Office, 1933. 


257 


17 


the cons 


I. Hygiene of premises 


Variations in the hygrometric ratio. 

First and foremost, frequent and sudden changes in temperature and humidity 
must be avoided. Changes in temperature, which, in themselves, may have 
but little effect on paintings, play an important part as determining factors of 
the degree of moisture attained. For this reason, special consideration must 
be niven to the system and organisation of heating and ventilation in museum 
rooms, in order that this relation between humidity and temperature may 
remain as constant as possible. 

Heating. 

Sioves should, wherever possible, be placed outside the exhibition rooms; 
under no circumstances should paintings be exposed to the direct radiation o 
h^t! Paintings will then be less suddenly affected by variations m temperature 
and, at the same time, the dust raised by the stoking of the stoves 

In the case of hot-air heating systems, care must be taken to provide the inlets 
with filters to obstruct the passage of dust and ensure the maintenance of a 
suitable degree of moisture. No paintings should be hung near a hot-air 
inlet, for the latter always sets up a circulation of air within a given space, pro- 
ducing distinctly harmful results and attracting towards it a certain quanti y 

i^Safors inevitably causes considerable dryness of the surrounding 
atmosphere, a dryness that can never be compensated by saturators, the effec 
of wWch b a museum room is entirely illusory. No central heating plant 
should be envisaged without an accompanying and appropriate apparatus for 
Luring proper humidification. Radiators should also be encased in order 
to prevent direct radiation of heat. Lastly, pictures must not be hung imme- 
diately above circulating pipes or radiators. _ ^ kpatinv as 

Low-pressure hot-water systems are always preferable to steam-heatmg, as 
they are equipped with bigger radiators, kept at a lower temperature, permit g 
S I more uSorm distribution of he..; moreover, when the he.ring .3 shut 
off the temperature falls less suddenly than is the case with steam-heatmg. 

It is to be noted that the mere presence, in exhibition galleries, of 
curtains and upholstered furniture, is an appreciable factor from the point 

view of compensating variations in temperature. 


258 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


Whatever system of heating may be adopted, care must be taken to avoid too 
sudden fluctuations of temperature, as these inevitably lead to changes in the 
hygrometric ratio; consequently, throughout the whole of the heating period, 
temperature should be maintained at a constant level both day and night. In 
this connection, seasonal heating, for example by steam pipes, should be exclud- 
ed. The maintenance of a constant temperature is equally desirable for 
water-colours, drawings, etc., although it is true that this class of exhibits is 
less subject to deterioration caused by that dryness which invariably plays 
such havoc with canvases and painted panels. 

Any modification made in the heating plant of a museum should be accom- 
panied by a close examination of the paintings exposed to the new conditions, 
so that the risks Involved by such modification may be obviated in time. 

Ventilation. 

Care must be taken to avoid any system of ventilation likely to produce 
excessive fluctuations in the ratio of humidity to temperature. 

Ventilation by means of windows should be prohibited in all cases where 
the air can be renewed by other means, such as doorways, air Inlets and 
exhausts, etc. 

Draughts are always a menace to panel paintings. 

An endeavour should therefore be made to ascertain what draughts may be 
set up in a museum room and steps taken to check them; very simple devices, 
such as the hanging of a light cord or tape at various spots along the walls or 
partitions on which the paintings are hung will immediately detect draughts. 
Draughts can be considerably attenuated by fixing hangings over the entrances 
to rooms. 

Cleaning of rooms. 

In rooms where the circulation of visitors is particularly Intense, the floors 
should be covered by rubber matting or any other material harbouring and 
creating the minimum of dust. Wilton carpet, which has the great drawback 
of collecting and raising dust, unless suitable cleaning apparatus is available, 
has, on the other hand, the advantage of assisting in regulating the degree of 
atmospheric humidity. 

Rooms should be cleaned by vacuum cleaners or by sweeping with moistened 
sawdust; ventilation, when permanent ventilating plant has not been installed. 


259 


T H E 


C O N S E RVATION OF PAINTINGS 


should never be effected before the rooms have been cleaned and dusted, in 
order that the dust may not be transferred from the floor to the pictures. 


Aspect of irooms. 

In the case of oil-paintings and tempera paintings, which can be shown in 
rooms with a southern aspect, care should always be taken to avoid the direct 
rays of the sun, which soften the paint layer and cause a dangerous desiccation 
of the supports. Light should, preferably, be attenuated by means of blinds, 
the thickness of which rather than the tint minimises the dangers of over bril- 
liance These blinds should be fitted in such a way as to harbour the least 
possible dust. In the summer, it is advisable to whitewash the outside surface 
of celling lights; this measure reduces glare and helps to diffuse the light. 

For this class of paintings also, lack of light, which in the long run causes the 
pigments to turn yellow (oil medium), should be avoided as much as possible. 

The same does not apply to water-colours, guazzo and drawings, which should 
be hung counter-light, preferably in rooms with a north light, and never perma- 
nently exposed. 

Fire prewntioii. 

Every possible precaution should be taken against risk of fire: mspectlon 
of heating plant, lighting conduits and wiring, plumbing, etc. A plan should 
be drawn up, systematically and briefly showing the action to be taken in case 
of an outbreak of fire: closing of all air-inlets, taking down of pictures, the posi- 
tion of which against walls and partitions makes them a particularly easy prey, etc. 
The type of fire-extinguisher supplied should be very carefully considered, as 
the majority of those on the market can cause serious damage to pictures. 

Smoking should be strictly prohibited in all parts of the buildings, 

II. Dusting and Cleaning of Pictures 



The dusting of pictures should be regarded as an exceptional measure; it 
should, however, invariably be done with the aid of a feather-duster or a veij 
soft brush and the surface of the pictures should be carefully and lightly touched. 
Under no circumstances should the surface of paintings be rubbed. 

Pictures should be hung with a slight tilt forwards to reduce the depositing 

of dust to a minimum. 


260 


THE C 0 N S E R V A T I O N ■ OF P A I N TING S 


If a picture seems to need more extensive cleaning, the curator should imme'* 

diately take the necessary steps. • • i 

In all cases, treatment wrongly regarded as harmless, such as washing with 
soap and water, must be strictly forbidden; the effects of such injurious methods 
do not manifest themselves Immediately, but, as a matter of fact, water can 
find its way, by capillary attraction, into the smallest fissure and crack of the 
paint layer and reach the priming, sooner or later causing separation and blister- 
ing, not to mention the damage which may be done to the varnish. 

Frames should be Inspected at regular intervals for the detection of, parasites 
which frequently attack them and the propagation of which may imperil the 
panels themselves. 


III. Exhibition Material 

In the framing of pictures, care should be taken to avoid all methods involving 
vibration and shock (nailing, for example) or likely to disturb the support in 
any way. Preference should be given to the use of steel clips fixed by means 
of screws. A certain play should be left in the rebate of frames. 

Pictures should never be hung directly against a wall or parfltion; In all cases, 
cleats should be provided to ensure a free air-space at the back of the support. 

When a museum building is situated on or near a main road with traffic, 
measures must be taken to prevent the vibration of walls from being commu- 
nicated to the pictures; this can be done by adopting a system of hanging with 
flexible hooks driven Into rubber plugs, for example. 

Protective glazing necessitated by the condition of certain exhibits or by the 
quantity of injurious matter in suspension in the surrounding air, should be 
fixed in such a way that it can easily be removed from the front without disturb- 
ing the painting. Glass which shows properties of crystallisation or mani- 
festly of a kind to retain moisture or favour the formation of mildew should be 
immediately removed and replaced by new material. 

IV. Restoration 

Whatever may be the nature of the deterioration calling for intervention,^ It 
is recommended that no action should be taken without the previous advice 
of a laboratory attached to one of the leading museums. If restoration proves 
to be necessary, the condition of the picture before and after restoration should 


261 


T H E ' CO N SE R V A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 



be photographically and radiographically recorded; a statement should also 
be prepared showing accurately and in detail what work Las been donCj with 
mention of the person responsible for the restoration (restoration index). 

The transfer of a painting to. a new support should be allowed only when 
every other measure of a less radical nature is recognised as inadequate and when 
all the external factors which may have occasioned the deterioration Lave been 
examined and eliminated. The efficacy and extent of restoration would in 
numerous cases be reduced if the reconditioned picture were again to be placed 
in the same surroundings and conditions as those which caused the damage. 

When, after obtaining qualified advice, retouching is deemed indispensable, 
this work should be visible to the naked eye. No circumstances can justify 
the concealment of any portion whatsoever of the original painting. 

Retouching should always be easily removable. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

OF STUDIES PUBLISHED IN THE REVIEW “ MOUSEION ” ON THt 

CONSERVATION AND RESTORATION OF PAINTINGS 

I. Scientific Examination of Paintings. 

Les methodes scientifiques en usage dans I’examen des peintures (J.-F. Cellener), Vol. 

O'-M, pp. 3-20. . ' . 

A comprehensive survey of the material characteristics of pictures anToS 

of examination applicable to them; physico-chemical analyses luminous radiation and other 
processes of investigation. - Recapitulation of the methods available for the scientific examinatio 
of pictures (paint layer and support). 

L’esamen des peintures et les moyens optiques (Professor Walter Graef f), Vol. 13-14, pp. 

3 1 illtis 

vlhe’ and possibilities of the optical examination of paintings: “ 
vaLus branches of the physical and chemical sciences as 
mination of subsequent examinations to be undertaken. - Procedure and 
Description of visible elements. - Crackles and their value for the purposes of diagnosis. ^ 

Uapport des precedes scientifiques dans la restauration des peintures (Jean-Gabnel 

Goulinat), Vol. 15, pp. 47-33. , . l J 

C„pr=l.«..iv, Wdy o. ,h. -ew oI X-,.,;. .1...-;..^ r.y. ^. nd 

rays in the revelation of restorations or additions and in determining or g 

L’examen des peintures aux rayons X. Son importance et ses Umites (Dr. Victor Bauer 

and Dr. Helmuth Rinnebach), Vol. 13-14, pp. 42-60, illus. 

The possibilities of X-ray examination as a method of investigating paintings; 
necessary ^he success of Juch examination. - Description of the “pParat^^^^ 

cedure) Ind of the constituent parts of a picture, in relation to their permeability to ^ X 
bg“rthe"r atomic weight or their thickness. - Importance of a methodical proportioning of the 

rays in establishing characteristic series. ^ w i l A 

L’examen des tableaux a I’Institut Holzknecht, de Vienne (Dr. Johannes Wilde). Vol. 16. 
pp. 18-25, illus. , . j 

The value of radiographs in examining the state of preservation of pictures, restorations and 
prevtui operli in revealing fakes or under-paint, and in the study of painting technique. - 

Special device for examining pictures by X-rays. w i gc gA 

La radiographie et le controle de Fauthenticite des tableaux (H. Boissonnas). Vol. 35-36. 

Description of the method of X-ray examination by which it is possible to detect the presence 
of inseSXrior to the execution of the picture : the priming, visible in a radiograph, fills the 
holes in the old panel on which the faker executed his painting. 


THE C 0 N S. E R V. A T I 0 N OF PAINTINGS 


La question de la deterioration des conlenrs par les rayons X (Dr. Ed. Petertil), VoL 21- 

22, pp. 27-31. 

Cases of temporary deterioration (pigments or media) after prolonged and strong exposure to 
X-rays. ~ Precautions to be taken to avoid accidental deterioration during radiography. 

Les rayons nltra'^violets appliques a Fesamen des conlenrs el des agglntinants (Professor 
A. Eibner), VoL 21-22, pp. 32-68. 

The function of ultra-violet rays in the examination of paintings. — Value of these rays in 
determining the state of preservation of the varnish and paint layers, and in identifying over- 
paints and retouching. ~ Typical optical reactions of dry colours and of colours prepared with 
a medium to ultra-violet rays. — Application of ultra-violet rays to archaeological research. 

LVxamen micro-cHmique des taMeanx et decorations murales (Professor A. Eibner), 
VoL 13-14, pp. 70-92. 

Present position with regard to research; need for collaboration between the history of art and 
painting technique, and the scientific analysis of the elements of a picture. — The examination 
of media; their role in the development of crackle. 

L’examen cMmique des tableaux (Professor F. E. C. Schaffer), VoL 13-14, pp. 93-103, illus. 

Methods of taking samples and of examination; typical reactions; classification of colours 
according to their chemical composition and period at which they were used for painting. — 
Chemical composition and appearance of colours under the microscope. 

L’araalyse cbimique appiiquee aux oeuvres d’art (Placido Geraci), VoL 1 9, pp. 47-64. 

Role of chemical analysis in the examination of painting materials. — Chemical composition 
of Egyptian, Roman and Pompeian colours. — Table of the principal natural and artificial colours, 
with their distinguishing reactions. — Table of media and their solvents. — (Chemical tests on 
metals). 

L’aualyse micro-cMmique des couleurs (Professor A. Eibner), VoL 29-30, pp. 1 13-126. 

Statement of the present position with regard to research and scientific methods applied to the 
analysis of colours. — Suggested methods of sampling and analysis for determining organic and 
inorganic colours; distinguishing reactions. 

La micropbotograpbie appHquee a Fetude de la tecbiiique de Rembrandt et de son 
ecoie (Professor A. P. Laurie), VoL 15, pp. 5-7, illus. 

The use of photographic enlargements in examining brushwork for the purposes of compa- 
rative study and identification. 

L^identification des oeuvres d’art et Fexamen photograpMque (Dr, G. Koegel), Vol, 19, 

pp. 78-82. 

Application of the principle of multiple coincidences for establishing the authenticity of works 
of art; use of lengths of multi-strand cables in preparing identification index-cards for modern 
paintings. 


264 


THE CONSERVATION OF P A I N T, I N G S 


Le laboratoire dm musee dii Louvre pour Fetude scieiitifiqiie de la peintiire (Joseph 
Billet), VoL 17-18, pp. i23-.|27. 

Description of equipment and apparatus (Dr. Perez’ ' * Pinacoscope ”) and report on work 
undertaken (examination of pictures under raking light). 

Un laboratoire pour Fexamen des peiiitiires (Professor A. P. Laurie), VoL 17-18, pp. 1 19- 
122, illus. 

Description of the principal equipments, devices and apparatus for the examination of paint- 
ings; taking of samples with the hypodermic needle, and microscopic examination; X-rays; ultra- 
violet rays; microphotography. 

L^examea scientiliqne des oeiavres d’art et leur restaiiratioii, Vol. 35-36, pp. 157-162. 

Methods adopted by the National School of Restoration, Milan, for the examination and res- 
toration of paintings. 

Les ficlies de renseigneirtents tecliniqiies siir les peintiares contemporaiaes (Akke Kumm- 
lien), Vol. 25-26, pp. 220-225. 

Importance of technical data concerning the structure of the paint layer in the restoration of 
paintings. Specimen record card, to be filled in by the artist, giving particulars on the materia! 
structure of the constituent elements of his picture and on the technique adopted for its execution. 

Constitution of documentary records. — Instruction in the science of painting materials in 
fine art schools 

IL Conservation of works of art. — Hygiene of picture galleries. 
Exhibition material. — Fire prevention. — Packing and transport. 

Les agents atmosplieriqaes et la conservation des cewvres d’art (Corrado Ricci), Vol. 1 5, 

pp. 8-13. 

External causes of deterioration in paintings (changes in atmospheric conditions, draughts, etc.); 
means of detecting and eliminating them. 

Controle et reglage de la temperatare et de Fhun^idite dans les musees (Werner Ahrens), 
Vol. 25-26, pp. 125-131, illus. 

Statement of the problem : climate and acclimatisation, humidity and temperature. Modern 
technique in the matter of controlling and adjusting relative humidity in museums. 

Hamidificatioii de Fair et aeration dans les musees (John M. McCabe), Vol. 15, pp. 54-57. 

Optimum degree of humidity for paintings. — Description and functioning of apparatus for 
washing and humidifying the air. — Various ventilation systems. 

Le clianlfagej la ventilation et Feclairage dans les salies d’exposition (J. F. Cellerier), 
Vol. 16, pp. 66-76. 

Genera! observations on the principal forms of disintegration of pictures. Air-conditioning 


265 



mi heating plant. — Modern lighting principles applied to exhibition rooms; general or local 
lighting. 

Installatioii de chauffage et de ventilation au Mnsee national de Stockholm (Hugo 
Theorell), Vol. 25-26, pp. 144-151, illus. 

Heating systems past and present. — Types and position of radiators in exhibition galleries. 
Circulation, renewal and conditioning of air. Regulating and adjusting devices. 

Pour proteger de la decoloration les objets exposes dans les musees (Pierre Champion). 
Vol. 19, pp. 76 and 77. 

Principle of the partial absorption of violet and ultra-violet rays by tinted glass. 

La protection des musees centre les dangers d’incendie (Documentation of the Interna- 
tional Museums Office), Vol. 25-26, pp. 132-143. 

Principal causes of fire in museums; architectural design and structural methods; external 
causes. — Prevention: museum fire-brigade; fireproofing of structural and decorative parts; 
insulation of electrical wiring and ducts. — Fire-prevention: supemsion by the staff, automatic 
detectors and alarms; fire-brigade and facilities for immediate action. 

Mesures a prendre dans les musees pour prevenir les incendies ou en limiter les effets 
(Dr. Redermann), Vol. 1 6, pp. 77-83, illus. 

Systematic exposition of the various causes of fire and the means of preventing it or limiting 
its damage. — Fire alarms and extinguishers. — Special device for placing valuable exhibits in 
safety. — Training of tbe staff and instructions to visitors. 

La preservation des musees centre les risques d’mcendie (Colonel Pouderoux), Vol. 10, 

pp. 26-31 • 

Systematic analysis of the chief causes of fire (faulty construction or installation, carelessness^ 
wilful damage). — Preventive measures and fire-fighting (detectors, extinguishers). 

La protection dn bois centre Fincendie (Capitaine Maruelle), Vol. 43-44, pp. 205-214. 

Nature of risks and analysis of the phenomena of combustion. Processes for protecting wood, 

fireproofing and casing. — Use of wood in building. 

La defense des musees en cas d’attaques aesiennes (A. Stix), Vol. 39-40. pp. 75-80. 

Systematic study of the effects of bombs according to the thickness and construction of walls 
and facings. — Organisation of measures against the effects of incendiary bombs. Httmg-up 
of basements; plan for the evacuation of objects; transport material and route to be ioiiowed. 

Les premieres mesures de defense du Prado au cours de la guerre, civile en Espagne 
(J. F, Sanchez-Canton), Vol. 39-40, pp. 67-73, illus. 

Evacuation of the rooms most exposed to danger, grouping of exhibits according to their value 

266 




in the most sheltered rooms. — Measures of protection. — Reception of works removed from 
threatened buildings. 

^organisation de la defense dii patrimoine artlstique et Mstoriqne espagnol pendant 
ia giierre civile (Jose Renau), Vol. 39-40, pp. 7-66, illus. 

the administrative organisation of the protection of monuments and works 

Systematic analysis of the methods adopted for the pro- 

the direct and indirect effects of bombardment. Study of the effects 
on media. — Detailed description of the methods of packing panel 
fes, and devices to prevent vibration, 


Documentation on 
of art in times of civil disturbance, 
tection of paintings against 

of incendiary bombs and gases ^ - 

paintings and canvases. — Atmospheric conditions in refug< 
shock and displacement of air. 

L^influence du climat maritiime siir les^ cEtivres 
prendre e» coers de transfert par voie de mer, 
d*ait (Enquiry — 

Replies to the enquiry 
curators and firms specialising in 

— Description of the methods of packing and of the precautions 
during transport and against deterioration due to changes " “ 

Les dangers de transport des oeuvres d’art 
77. 

Principle o{ the circulation of works of art and the dangers to which paintings are thereby 
exposed: change of climate, transport accidents,, etc. '^Sedentary' and migratory wor s 
of art. 

Le transport et I’emballage des objets pour I’exposition d’art italien a Paris, 1935 (Piero 

Sanpaolesi), Vol. 29-30, pp. 127-131, illus. 

Railway transport. — Technique of the packing of panel paintings and canvases: matenal, 
radling and cases; packing of frames and glass. 

m. Technique of the Restoration of Pictures. 

Les de la restauration des «Buvres d’art (Dr. H. E. van Gelder), Vol. 15. pp. 67-69. 

Expose and defence of the principle of the intangibility of pictures and the need for limiting 
treatment to oparations which add nothing to the original esthetic elements. 

La conservation des peintures de chevalet. - Les supports et les fonds (Dr. Victor Bauer- 
Bolion), Vol. 23-24, pp. 68-91. illus. 

Analysis of the various types of deterioration in paintings due to the support and to the priming, 
and, by deduction, to atmospheric conditions. — Causes of crackle m paintings executed on canvas, 
remedies and prevention. — Causes of crackle, fissures and blistering in panel paintings; remedira 
and prevention. - Analysis of movement, distortion and deterioration in canvas and wood 

supports. 


d’ast et les mesures de protection a 
•, — - Transport et emballage des oeuvres 
conducted by the International Museums Office), Vol. 23-24, pp. 21 1 -231. 

conducted by the International Museums Office received from museums 
the various methods of packing and transporting works or art. 

’ 5 to be taken against accidents 

in atmospheric conditions. 

(Dr. A. Bredius and N. Roerich), Vol. 15, pp. 75- 



THE C 0 N S E R V ATION OF PAINTINGS 


La veWMOuiure des meubles et des bois sculptes (Dr. Robert Regnier), Vol. 25-26, pp. 197- 

201, ilks. 

Various wood, parasites; modes and periods of attack. Preventive measures (disinfection 
of exhibition rooms and treatment of objects recently added to collections); curative treatment 
(destruction of insects in air-tight chambers or by the direct application of insecticides). — Conso- 
lidation of worm-eaten objects (formulae). 

Metliodes de coisservatioB des pelntures aiicieiiiies (Tito Venturini Papari), Vol. 1 6, pp. 8-1 7. 

Description of the principal forms of deterioration in pictures. Technique of lining, refining 
and transfer of panel paintings. — Treatment of blisters. — Restoration of frescoes and burnt- wax 
paintings. 

Nettoyage, reetoilage et vernissage des peietiires (P. Tudor-Hart), Vol 15, pp. 23-40, ilks. 

Processes and the selection of cleaning solutions. — Method of relining and choice of adhesive, 
— Preparation and rectifying of linseed oil. — Varnishing with virgin linseed oil previously 
clarified. 

La technique de la conservation des tableaux (Helmut Ruhemann), Vol 15, pp. 14-22. 

Description of a few methods of reconditioning the support: plywood backing, cradling with 
battens laid flat and cradling with battens on edge; treatment of the paint layer: blistering (des- 
cription of the electrical apparatus), recognisable additions; varnish; use of the spray-gun. 

Methodes de restauration et de conservation des peintures des ecoles hollandaise et 
fiamande (Dr. Martin de Wilde), Vol 15, pp. 41-46. 

General observations on the preliminary examination of pictures and consideration of the 
surroundings; maladies of the support and paint layer, their causes. ““ Wax lining and size lining. 

L’application dkn nouveau support en hois dans le transfert des peintures sur panneau 
(Dr. Erich Wiese), Vol. 16. pp. 5-7, ilks. 

Description of the process of transferring, with a resin adhesive, a painting to a new support 
C'Ensoplatten' O; planing of the original back and application of the new support with cold che- 
mical glue. 

Le devernissage des tableaux anciens et la suppression des repeints (Professor A. P. 
Laurie), Vol 25-26, pp. 216-219. 

Variable sensitiveness of the different layers of a picture to the solvents used. ~ Need for a 
previous optical and chemical examination. — * Varnish removal by dissolution or by softening 
the layer, followed by scraping. — ■ Recipes and processes. The question of technique and style 
in varnish removal. 

La reconstitution du procede a . Fencaustique et son application dans la tecimique pic-- 
turale moderne (Dr. Hans Schmidt), Vol 23-24, pp. 30-49, ilks. 

Historical survey of the technique and implements used for burnt-wax paintings; analysis of 


268 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


the process and. materials (pigment, medium and priming); modern technique and application 
of the process; electrical equipment. The use of burnt-wax painting in restoration work. 

Une metliode ie restauration a la cire neiitre (Helmut Ruhemann), Vo!. 17-18, pp. 167 
and 1 68. 

Formulae and practical data concerning the process adopted by the restorer A. Klausner, per- 
mitting of executing retouchings that do not deteriorate and which may be removed at any time. 

Noiivelles metliodes appliqiiees a Fetude des ceuvres d^art (Igor Grabar), Vol. 1 1 , pp. 117- 
127. 

Description of the method of removing and conserving super-imposed paintings, adopted in 
the Central Restoration Studios, Moscow. 

Problemes de restauration des icones et fresques msses (Youri Olsoufiev), VoL 27-28, 
pp. 228-236, iilus. 

General principles of restoration: cases of total or partial suppression of repaints or their reten- 
tion. — Recognisable additions. — Special technique of early Russian painting. — Processes for 
the removal of repaints. ““ Technique of the exfoliation of successive repaints in order to conserve 
the different stages of the work. — Treatment and repair of wood panels, disjointed or attacked 
by insects. — Restoration of frescoes: dry and wet processes. — Various forms of deterioration 
of frescoes; their restoration and fixing. 

Quelques recedes restaurations de peintures de la Toscane (Ugo Procaccl), Vol. 33-34, 
pp, 227-246, iilus. 

General principles of examination, recording and filing of documentary material. •— Description 
of cleaning and consolidation operations, transfer, and restoration of the paint layer, executed m 
a certain number of Tuscan masters (Primitives of the XVIth century). 

La restaaration d’ane toile da Greco (Manuel Grau Mas), Vol. 27-28, pp. 223-227, iilus. 

Examination of the deteriorations and previous restorations of the painting. • Description 
of the various operations: rellning, cleaning, suppression of former repaints; execution of recog- 
nisable retouching. 

Restaaratioa d’ane peintare sar bois aa Masee National de Cracovie (Professor Jean 
Hoplinski), Vol. 37-38, pp. 193-209, iilus. 

Methodical description of the treatment of XVth century panel painting: analysis and des- 
cription of the constituent parts of the picture; colours, media and support. Consolidation and 
treatment of the panel. — Cleaning of the picture and removal of repaints. — Retouchings. — 
Treatment of the frame. — • Analysis of style. 

La restauration dn tableau N° 371 de la Galerie Borgbese (A. de Rinaldis), Vol 37-38, 
pp. 211-221, iilus. 

Critical analysis of the attribution of pictures and of data concerning style. — Graphic confir- 


269 


THE C ON S E R V A T I 0 N 


P A I NT IN G S 


mation of attribution to Raphael. — Radiographic examination. — Transfer. Removal of 

repaints and consolidation of damaged areas. 

La Restauration de la Vierge de I’Aracoeli (Emilio Lavagnino), Vol. 43-44, pp. 191-204, 

illus. 

Analysis of the work from tlie standpoint of style and materials. — Review of previous alter- 
ations. — Description of stripping and restoration. Dating of the work 

La conservation et la restanration des peintnres murales (Professor' E. , Lavagnino), VoL 
3940, pp. 223-235. 

Analysis of the various techniques: burnt-wax painting, frescoes, oil-pamt, oils, varnish and 
Forms of deterioration and destructive agents. — “ Consolidation, according to the con- 
dition of the support, and description of methods of transfer. - Examples of mural paintings 
removed from their original location and exhibited in museums. 

La conservation des peintures et stucs, importance de la reproduction pliotograpliique 
(Goffredo Bendineili), Vol. 16, pp. 26-30. 

Statement of the problem of the conservation of ancient paintings and mural decoration removed 
to museums. — Importance of the classification and systematic grouping of decorative fragments. 
— Enhancement of old stucco. 

Transport de fresques orientales sur de nouveaus supports (George L. Stout and Ruther- 
ford J. Gettens), Vol. 17-18, pp. 107-1 12, illus. 

Examples of frescoes preserved in museums; treatment and consolidation of the paint layer; 
transfer to a new support; removal of the original ground and application of a permanent support 
of cement and asbestos. 

Restauration d’un relief d’argile peint (George L. Stout), Vol. 29-30, pp. 105-112, illus. 

Methodical analysis of the structure. — Description of the operations : consolidation of the 
paint layer and removal of the old support; reinforcement of the back and application of a new 
support; treatment of the paint layer. 

La conservation des estampes, dessins et manuscrits (H. J. Plenderleith), Vol. 29-30. 
pp. 81-104, and Vol. 33-34, pp. 199-226, illus. 

I Nature and resistance of the constituent elements. - II. Mounting, storing and display. 
— III. Deterioration and reconditioning. — IV. Practical methods of cleaning and repair- 

ing. ■ ■ ■ ■■ 

Le transfert sur un nouveau support d’une aquarelle sur parchemin (Paul Hubner), 
Vol. 31-32. pp. 179-181. 

Description of transfer operations: consolidation hi the paint layer, 
impermeabilisation; application of layers of paper on the front, scraping of the parchment, transfer 
to a prepared cardboard support and removal of the protective covering. 


270 


TABLE OF C0L01 




The following table of colours may be used for reference in the study of paintings 
and in the choice of materials for restoration. 

The range of pigments given in the table is confined to those which are used today 
or which are k^own or presumed to have been used in the past for easel paintings. 

As the source of many of the pigments used in tempera painting in medieval times 
cannot, at this stage, be determined with exactitude, and as it is likely, in some cases 
at least, that they derive from those colouring matters used for years^ previously tn 
the illumination of manuscripts, some of the latter colours have been included. 

The list does not pretend be comprehensive in regard to the comparatively modern 

lake colours whose number is legion. i . n 

Difficulties of classification arise in the case of different pigments sharing the 
same name, and also in the case of modern substitutes for a pigment to which the 
traditional name has been given though differing in chemical composition and pro^ 
bably in permanence. In the former case, the names are given between inverted 
commas; in the second, the reader will be guided by the data concerning the com- 
position of the pigments and the relevant chemical formula. 


WHITE 


WHITE 



USUAL 

NAMES 


COMPOSITION 

USE IN PAINTING 

ALTERATION AND RESTORATION 

English 

French 

German 

Italian 

1 

i 



White Lead 

Flake White ^ 
Cremnitz White 

Blanc de plomb 

Blanc d’argent 
^ Ceruse 

Bleiweiss 

Kremserweiss 

Biacca 

Bianco d’argento 
Cerussa 

Basic carbonate of lead. 

2 PbCOa, Pb(OH)2 
perhaps with barium sulphate 
BaSOj 

from earliest times to today. Great covering power, density 
and brilliant whiteness. Very poisonous. Incompatible 
with verdigris and orpiment and, in general, with impure 
colours containing sulphur or selenium. 

Blackened by sulphuretted hydrogen, not much in oil, but speedily 
in aqueous media. 

Restoration: Watercolour, by exposure to hydrogen-peroxide vapour; 
oil-colour, by scraping to remove blackened surface. 

; Zinc White 

Blanc de zinc 

Zinkweiss 

Bianco di zinco 

Zinc oxide. 

ZnO 

From 1787 to today. Minerals containing zinc may possibly 
be found present as impurities in colour mixtures from ear- 
liest times (Zincbliite). 


Titanium White ■ 

Blanc de Titane 

Titan weiss 

Bianco di titanic 

Titanium oxide. 

Ti 02 perhaps with barium sul- 
phate BaSO.! 

from 1870 to today. The commercial preparation dates from 
about 1850, Great covering power, brilliantly white and 
‘ non-poisonous. Not much used in easel painting. Good 
substitute for white lead in tempera. 


Bone White 

Blanc d’os 

Beinweiss 


Calcined bones» mainly calcium 
phosphate. 

Osed in tempera. Compatible with verdigris and orpiment 
(see white lead, above). 


Chalk 

Craie 

Kreide 

Greta 

Calcium carbonate. 

CaCOa 

From earliest times to today. For tempera, pastel, preparing 
! painting grounds and as a filling material. 

Decomposed by acids. 

Lime putty 

Lut 

Geloschter Kaik 


Stiff slaked lime. 

Practically Ca(OH )2 

For fresco painting. 

Decomposed by acids. 

Carbonated lime putty 
St John’s White 

Blanc de Saint- Jean 

Johannes weiss 

Bianco sangiovanni 

Practically CaCOg 

dainly for fresco painting. Dense and brilliant. Referred 
to by Cennino Cennini (1437). 

Decomposed by acids. 

Gypsum 

Lightspar 

Pl^tre — gypse 

Gips 

Gesso 

Calcium sulphate. 

CaS 04 - 2 H 20 

Tom earliest times to today. For tempera, pastel, preparing 
painting grounds and as a filling material. 


White Clay 

Kaolin. China or Pipe 
Clay. White bolus 

Kaolin. Blanc de Chine 
Terre de pipe 

Kaolin 

Pfeifenton 

Pfeifenerde 

Gaolino 

Terra da porcellana 

Derived from the decomposition 
of feldspar. Mainly aluminium 
silicate. 

’rom earliest times to today. For tempera, pastel, preparing 
painting grounds and as a filling material. Also used as a 
ground for gold. 

I 

1 , 

Barium White 

Heavy spar 

Blanc de baryte 

Blanc fixe 

Barytweiss 

Permanent weiss 

Bianco di barite 

Barium sulphate. 

BaSOi 

Tom second half of XI Xtb century to today. 


Lithopone 

Lithopone 

Lithopon 

Litopone 

Zinc sulphide with some oxide 
and barium sulphate. 

’rom 1847 to today. For oil, tempera and pastel, and espe- 
cially for decorator’s paints as a substitute for white lead. 
Non-poisonous. Does not darken. Not much used in 
! easel painting. 

i , ' ,■ . . 

■ 274 

j: : ■ 275 

i 

1 ; 







YELLOW 


YELLOW 


USUAL NAMES 

COMPOSITION i 

USE IN PAINTING 

ALTERATION AND RESTORATION 

English 

Ochres and Siennas 
(Ochre — Mars 
yellow) 

French 

Ocres et siennes (ocre 
jaune — jaune de 
Mars) 

German 

Ocker und Sienna 
(Gelber Ocker — 
Marsgelb) 

Italian 

Ocra — Gialla 

Earths coloured by iron oxides. 
Mars yellows are synthetic la- 
boratory products. 

From earliest times to today. 

Slight darkening in oil 

Cadmium yellow . 

Jaune de cadmium 

Kadmiumgelb 

Giallo di cadmio 

Cadmium sulphide. 

CdS. 

From 1818 to today. 

Mixtures with pigments containing lead or copper darken. 

Naples yellow 

June de Naples 

Neapelgelb 

Giallo di Napoli 
Giallorino 

Lead antimonate. 

Pb3(Sb04)a 

From 1700 to today. ^ 

The powdered pigment has abrasive properties. Must not be 
ground with steel spatula in the absence of binding medium. 

Darkened by sulphuretted hydrogen. Modern substitutes contain 
cadmium yellow, ochres and white. 

Chrome yellow 

Jaune de chrome 

Chromgelb 

Giallo di cromo 

Neutral or basic chromates of 
lead. 

PbCr04 

From 1809 to today. 

Darkened ny sulphuretted hydrogen. ^ ^ 

Restoration: Watercolour by hydrogen-peroxide vapour; oils by 
scraping. 

Zinc yellow 

Jaune de zinc 

Zinkgelb 

Giallo di zinco 

Zinc chromate. 

ZnCr 04 

From 1809 to today. 

Slightly soluble in drying oils. 

Barium yellow 
Permanent yellow^ 
Yellow ultra-marine 

Jaune de baryum 
Jaune permanent 
Jaune d’outre-mer 

Baryumgelb 

Giallo di barite 

Barium chromate. 

BaCrOi 

^rom 1 809 to today. 


Strontium yellow 

Jaune de strontium 

Strontiumgelb 

Giallo di stronziana 

Strontium chromate. 

SrCr 04 

From 1809 to today. 


Cohalt yellow 

Jaune de cobalt 

Kobaltgelb 

Giallo di cobalto 

Cobalt potassium nitrite. 
2CoK3(N02)e,3HaO 

From 1848 to today. 


Massicot 

Massicot 

Bleigelb 

Massicot 

Giallorino 

Lead oxide. 

PbO 

From earliest times to XlXth century. 

Darkens. Oil and tempera may be treated with hydrogen-peroxide 

scraping if necessary. 

Orpiment 

King’s Yellow 

Orpiment 

Auripigment 

Orpimento 

Sesquisulphide of arsenic. 

AS 2 S 3 

From earliest times to XlXth century. 

Very poisonous. 


: Mosaic-gold 

Or mussif 

Mosaikgold 

Oro musivo 

Golden-yellow crystalline stanic 
sulphide. 

SnS 2 

iprom XIVth to XVIIth century. Used to some extent for 
; imitating gilding in panel painting. 


Antimony sulphides 

Sulfures d’antimoine 

Antimonsulfid 

Solfuri di antimonio 

SbaSs As substitute for gold, XVIth-XVIIth centuries. 

' ■ ' - '".I. 


276 


277 



YELLOW (Contd.) 


YELLOW (Contd.) 



USUAL 

NAMES 


COMPOSITION 

USE IN PAINTING 

ALTERATION AND RESTORATION 

English 

French 

German 

Italian 




Indian yellow 

Jaune indien 

indischgelb 

Giallo indiano 

Purrea 

Magnesium euxanthate made from 
urine of cows fed on mango 
leaves from Monghyr, India. 

Has been used mainly for the illumination of manuscripts. 

Durable when pure but often adulterated, e.g. with chrome yel- 
low. Lake pigments are used as substitutes, today under the 
same name. 

■ Bile yellow (Lom- 
bard gold colour) 

Jaune de bile 

Galigelb 



Orpiment substitute. A medieval colour used mainly for illu- 
; mination. 

Bleaches and sometimes darkens. 

■ Saffron 

Safran 

Safran 

Zafferano 

Dried stigmas of the saffron cro- 
cus (crocus sativus). 

A medieval colour used mainly for illumination. 

■■ 

Easily bleached by , light 

The principal medieval yellows, apart from gold, are orpiment (yellow sulphide of arsenic) and ochre, giallorino (probably mas- 
sicot—lead oxide— in the majority of cases), mosaic gold, saffron, buckthorn and weld. (Cf. Thompson: Materials of Medieval 
'Painting), 



RED 






RED 


USUAL 

NAMES 


COMPOSITION 

USE IN PAINTING 

ALTERATIONS AND RESTORATION 

English 

French 

German 

Italian 




Burnt red ochre and 
red earth colour. 
Burnt Sienna. En- 
glish, Indian, Pom- 
peian, Persian or 
Venetian Reds. 

Mars Reds. 

Pozzuoli Earth. 
Santorin Earth 
/^Sinopis’’, etc. 

Couleurs d*ocre rouge 
brulee et de terre 
rouge. Terre de 
Sienne brulee. Rouge 
d’Angleterre (col- 
cathar, caput mor- 
tis). Rouges indien, 
pompeien, de Perse, 
venitien. Rouges de 
Mars* Terre de 
Pouzzolles. Santo- 
rin, « sinople », etc. 

Gebrannter iichter 
Ocker ; rote Er- 
den, geb. Sienna ; 
Englisch, Indisch, 
Pompejanisch, Per- 
sisch oder Vene- 
tianisch rot ; Mars 
Rote ; Pozzuoli 

Erde ; Caput mor- 
tuum, etc. 

Ocra rossa — Rosso in- 
glese 

Earths coloured by iron oxides, 
either natural red ochres or 
burnt ochres occurring in vol- 
canic districts or synthetic com- 
pounds. 

I ■ 

[From earliest times to today. 

j'. 

1. ■■ 

1 

Sometimes blackened by exposure to the sun. No satisfactory 
treatment known. 

Ginnaher 

Vermilion :.■ ■ , 

Cinabre 

Vermilion 

Zinnober 

Vermiglione 

Cinabro 

Rosso Chinese 

Mercuric sulphide. 

HgS. 

; From earliest times to today. Cinnabar was gradually replaced 
by synthetic vermilion. 

The blackened surface may he removed by scraping, 


278 


279 




RED (Conti) RED (Conti) 



USUAL 

NAMES 


COMPOSITION 

USE IN PAINTING 

ALTERATION AND RESTORATION 

English 

French 

German 

Italian 







Cadmium red 
Serenium red 

Rouge de cadmium 
Rouge de selenium 

Kadmium rot 

Rosso di cadmio 

Cadmium selenide with perhaps 
a little cadmium sulphide. 

CdSe with CdS 

From 1817 to today. 

Mixtures with pigments containing lead or copper darken. 

Chromium red 

Rouge de chrome 

Chromrot 

Rosso di cromo 

Basic lead chromate, 

Pb2Cr06 

From 1809 to today. 

Blackened by sulphuretted hydrogen. Turned yellow by acetic 
acid. 

Minium 

Saturn red 

Red lead 

Minium 

Rouge de Saturne 
Rouge de plomb 

Mine rouge 

Mennige 

Bleirot 

Minio 

Rosso di Saturno 
Rosso di piombo 
Rosso di Parigi 

Lead oxide. 

PbaO^ 

From earliest times to today, 

Blackened by sulphuretted hydrogen. 

Restoration: As lor blackened white lead (see above). ■ 

Realgar 

Realgar 

Arsenic orange 

Realgar 

Realgar 

Arsenic sulphide. 

AS2S2 

From earliest times to XIXth century. 

.■ Very poisonous. 

Converted to orpiment (yellow) in bright sunlight. 

Restoration of colour by scraping. 

Thyrrhian Purple 
Shellfish red 

Pourpre de Tyr 

Thyrrhenischer 

Purpur 

Porpora 

From Murex etc. 

[Give a wide range of colour: red to black, often with a bluish 
tinge. From 1 st century to medieval period, for encaustic 
i painting and illumination. 


Lichen red 

Archil 

Roccelle 

Orseille 


Oricello 

From the lichen. 

Roccella tinctoria 

! Reddish purple. Used in the middle ages mainly for manu- 
script illumination. 


(Cochineal) 

Crimson lake 

Carmine, 

Indian lake 

(Cocheniile), Carmin 
Laque carrainee 

Rouge ecarlate 

Laque indienne 

Cochenille 

Karmin 

Indischer Lack 

(Cocciniglia) 

Rosso di cocciniglia 
Acido 0 Carminio 
(lacca) 

Acidio carminicio 

Cochineal. 

^ Crimson. 

Not particularly durable. 

Tends to become pale. 

Ceylon brazilwood 

Bois du Bresil 

Brasilholz 

Legno rosso 

Legno del Brazile 

Essential dyestuff • Brasilin. 
G16H14O5 

Medieval pigment used for manuscript illumination. 


Madder 

Laque de garance 


Robbia 

Garanza 

Essential dyestuff : Alizarin. 
CiiHeOafOH)^ 

XIVth century. From XVIIth century to today. 

Tends to become pale. 

“Cynople” 

<c Sinople » 



A mixed pigment containing lac, 
brazil, cochineal, etc. 

Medieval pigment used for manuscript illumination. 

Tends to become pale. 

Dragon Blood 

Sang de dragon 

Drachenblut 

Sangue di drago 

Brownish red gum-resin. 

For lacquering gold, and as a pigment in medieval times for j 
1' manuscript illumination. 



The principal red pigments of the middle ages are the red ochres, orange lead, vermilion (replacing natural cinnabar), kermes and 1 
grain (chiefly in the form of lakes made from the shearings of cloths dyed with them), lac, brazil, madder (chiefly in combination with 
lac and grain and brazil in the compound cynople), and dragon’s blood. (Cf. Thompson: Materials of medieval painting,) ! 


280 


281 





BLUE 


BLUE 


English 

Natural ultramarine 
Lapis lazuli 

USUAL 

French 

Outremer nature! 
Lapis lazuli 

Bleu d azur 

^ NAMES 

German 

Natiirlicbes Ultra- 
marin 

Lasurstein 

Italian 

Oltremare naturale 

Lapis lazzuli 

COMPOSITION 

Compound silicate of alumi- 
nium, calcium and sodium, 
containing sulphur. Mineral. 

; USE IN PAINTING 

i 

‘ From earliest times to XIXth century. 

ALTERATION AND RESTORATION 

Decomposed by acids. 

Artificial ultrama- 
'.rine 

Outremer artificiel 

Synthetisches Uitra- 
marin 

Oltremare 

artificiale 

Ditto — synthetic. 

A furnace product 

From 1825 to today. 

Cheap ultremarines are unreliable. 

Decomposed by acids. 

Incompatible with colours containing copper. 

Azurite,;. 

Azurite 

Bergblau 

Kupferlasur 

Azzurite 

Azzuro di Montagna 

Basic carbonate of copper. Mineral. 
CuCOaCufOH)^ 

From earliest times to XIXth century. 

Best when not finely ground. 

Darkened by excess of oil, which is speedily yellowed, the pigment 
becoming green. ■ Incompatible with pigments containing sulphur. 

Smalt 

Smalt 

Bleu de Smalt 

Smalte 

Snialto 

Powdered cobalt glass; a silicate 
of potash and cobalt. 

From middle of XVIth century to today. 

Unsuitable for use in oils. 

Prussian blue 

Antwerp blue 

Bleu de Prusse 

Bleu de Paris 

Preussiscb Blau 
Berliner Blau 

Azzuro di Prussia 
Azzuro di Berlino 

Ferric ferrocyanide. 

Fe4(Fe(CN)e)2 

Antwerp blue and milori blue 
are of related composition. 

From 1704 to today. 

'Used with chrome yellow to make the mixed greens called 
chrome, cinnabar or Brunswick greens. 

Turned brown by alkali. Watercolour mixtures with zinc white 
bleach in sunlight hut recover in the dark. 

Cobalt blue 

Bleu de cobalt 

Bleu de Tbenard 

Kobaltblau 

Azzuro di cobalto 
Oltremare di cobalto 

A furnace product made by beat- 
ing cobalt salts with clay. 

jFrom 1777 to today. 


Cerulean blue 

Bleu ceruleum ou ce- 
ruleen 

Bleu celeste 

Coeruleum 

Ceruleum 

Bleu celeste 

A furnace product made by heat- 
ing cobalt salts with tin oxide. 

1 From 1 805 to today. 

■ 


Monastral blue 

Bleu monastral 

Monastral Blau 


A stable organic complex con- 
taining copper in non-reactive 
combination. 

Introduced in 1935. 

A good substitute for Prussian blue in oil colour. 


Copper-ammonialime 

blues 

Bleus a base de cuivre, 
ammoniaque et cbaux 

Kupferblau 

Azzuri cupro- 
ammoniacali 

Many medieval recipes. 

A widespread substitute for ultramarine and azurite in the 
middle ages. 

Tends to become green through loss of ammonia. 

Indigo 

Indigo 

Indigo 

Indigo 

From Indihofera iinctoria. 

From earliest times to the XIXth century. 

Not permanent in oils, but has resisted well in paintings by Franz 
Hals. 

Woad 

GuMe 

Waid, Pastel, 
Farberwaid 

Guado 

Pastello 

From hatis iinctoria. 

From earliest times to the XVIIth century. 

Fades. 

Turnsole 

Croton des teinturiers 
Crozophore tinctoriale 

Krebskraut 

Tornasoie in pezza 

0 di Provenza 

From Crozophora iinctoria. 

From Xllth to XVIIth century. 

Fades. 

Egyptian blue 

Bleu d’Egypte 

Egyptisch Blau 

Bleu Egiziano 

A glass frit containing copper. 

CaO. CuO. 4Si02 

Used in antiquity, in Egyptian, Greek and Greco-Roman paint- 
ing and sporadically later. 



282 


283 



VIOLET AND PURPLE 



USUAL 

NAMES 


COMPOSITION 

English 

French 

German 

Italian 


Ultramarine violet 

Outremer violet 

Ultramarin Violett 

Oltremare violetto 

See artificial ultramarine. 

By increasing the temperature 
of the furnace, a blue-violet 
product is obtained. 

■Cobalt violet' ■ 

Violet de cobalt 

Kolbaltviolett_ 

Cobalto violetto 

Compound of cobalt oxide and 
clay, with phosphoric and ar- 
senic acids. Furnace product. 

Manganese violet 
Mineral violet. 
Nuremberg violet 

Violet de manganese 
Violet mineral 

Violet de Nuremberg 

Manganviolett 

Mineral-oder 

Niirnberg-Voilett 

Violetto di 
manganese 

Violetto minerale 
Violetto di 

Norimberga 

Phosphate of manganese. 

Tyrian purple 

Pourpre de Tyr 

■ 

Tyrrhenisch Purpur 

' 

Porpora di Tiro 

From a mollusc found in the Me- 
diterranean (genus Purpura 
or Murex). Dibromic indigo, 
which forms a large proportion 
of the colouring matter, can be 
made synthetically. 

See shellfish reds. 

Purple of Cassius 

Pourpre de Cassius 

Cassius Purpur 

Porpora di Cassio 

Purple-coloured body obtained 
from tin and gold chlorides. 

Turnsole purple 

Pourpre des 
des teinturiers 



See turnsole blue. The alka- 
line extract of Crozophora is 
purple. 

Lichen purple 

■Pourp.re de lichen 



See lichen reds. 


VIOLET AND PURPLE 


USE IN PAINTING 

ALTERATIONS AND RESTORATION 

From 1840 to today. Useful in fresco paintings; poor tinc- 
torial value in oils. 

More stable to acids than ultramarine blue. 

From about 1859 to today. 

A bright transparent violet. Permanent. 


From about 1868 to today. 

A dull-violet pigment. 

/Permanent. 


From earliest times to today. (See note on shellfish reds.) 


Used in middle ages for manuscript illumination; today only 
in the ceramic industries. 


Used in medieval painting. 


Used in medieval painting. 


1 : 


284 


285 



GREEN 

USUAL 

NAMES 


COMPOSITION 

USE IN PAINTING 

ALTERATION AND RESTORATION 

green 

English 

French 

German 

Italian 





■ ; Green eartli : (Bohe- 
mian and Vero- 
nese, Venitian green 

Terre verte (vert de 
Boheme, « Vert Ve- 
ronese:», vert celadon 

Seladon griin 

Terra verde 

Earth coloured with iron silicates. 

From earliest times to today. 

Light bluish grey to dark brownish olive. Much used in early 
Italian painting. 



Malachite 

Mountain Green 

Vert malachite 

Vue de montagne 

Berggriin 

Azurgriin 

Malachit 

Malachite 

Verde minerale 
Chrysocamma 

Verde di montagna 
Verde di rama 

Basic carbonate of copper. 
Artificial carbonate of copper. 
CuCo 3 , Cu( 0 H )2 

From earliest times to today. 

Mixtures with pigments containing sulphur darken. Decora- 

posed by acids. 

Verdigris 

Vert de gris 

Griinspan 

Aerugo 

Basic acetate of copper and various 
mixtures. Salt green contains 
also chloride; Rouen green con- 
tains also copper soap. 

2Cu(CH3COO)2. Cu(OH) 2 . SHaO 

From earliest times to the XlXth century. 

j: 

1 

Mixtures with pigments containing sulphur darken. 

Scheeie’s green 
Mineral green 

Vert de Scheele 

Scheelesgriin 

Schwedischgriln 

Verde di Scheele 

Copper hydrogen arsenite. 

CuAsOa. CuO. 2 H 2 O 

iFrom 1778 to XlXth century. 

Mixtures with pigments containing sulphur darken. 


Veronese green 
Schweinfurt green 
‘ ‘ Emerald green ^ 

Paris Green 

Vert de Schweinfurt 
(( Vert Veronese » 

« Vert Emeraude )> 

Sch weinf urtergr iin 
Deckgriin 

Verde di 

Schweinfurt 

Copper aceto-arsenite. 

3CuO, AS 2 O 3 . Cu(C 2 H 302)2 
''Emerald green” is a related 
compound. 

From 1800 to today. 

Very poisonous. 

Mixtures with pigments containing sulphur darken. 

Cobalt green 

Zinc green 

Rinnmann’s green 

Vert de cobalt 

Kobaltgriin 

(Trukisgriin) 

Verde di cobalto 

Compound of cobalt oxide and 
zinc oxide, (Furnace product.) 

From 1 870 to today. 


Oxide of Chromium 
(matt) 

« Chrome green » 

Oxyde de chrome mat 
« Vert de chrome » 

Chromoxyd grun 
(matt) 

Verde Guignet 

Verde smeraldo 

Sesquioxide of chromium. 

CrBOs 

From 1809 to today. 


Oxide of Chromium 
transparent or 

brillant) Viridian 

(Oxyde de chrome 
transparent ou bril- 
lant) « Vert eme- 
raudew, Vert Guigne 

Chromoxydgriin 

feuring 


Hydrated oxide of chromium. 
Cr 203 , 2 H 2 O 

From 1838 to today. 


Natural' '.green . dye- ' 
stuflfs, Sap green, 
Iris green. Honey- 
suckle, Night- 
shade. etc. 

Vert de vessie 

Saftgriin 

Verde di vessica 

From Rhamnus berries. 

The juice of the fruit, flower or 
leaves of plants, often mixed 
with alum. 

XIVth and XVth centuries. 

Used mostly for manuscript illumination. 

All natural green dyestuffs fade on exposure to light. 

286 

287 


BROWN 


Ejixxj' rr i f 

USUAL NAMES 

COMPOSITION 

English 

Raw^ and burnt 
Umbers 

French 

Ombres naturelles et 
■ brulees 

German 

Umbra. Rohe oder 
gebrannte Braun- 
eisenerze. 

Italian 

Terra d’ombra 

Earth colours containing iron and 
manganese. 

Vandyke brown . 
Cassel brown 

Cologne Earth 

Brun van Dyck 

Terres de Cassel on 
de Cologne 

Van Dyck Braun 
Cassel Braun 

Terra di Cassel o di 
Colonia 

Iron oxide with lignite. 

Prussian brown 

Brun de Prusse 

Preussisch Braun 

Bruno di Prussia o 
di Berlino 

Ignited Prussian blue. 

Verona brown 

Ignited green earth 

Brun de Verone 

Terre verte bruiee 

Gebrannte 
griine Erde 

Terra verde 
bruciata 

Ignited green earth. 

Bitumen 

Bitume 

Asphalt braun 

Bitume 

A general name for deep brown 
or black, solid or semi-solid or- 
ganic substances of indefinite 
composition obtained naturally 
or prepared by the distillation 
of wood, etc. 1 

Sepia 

Sepia 

Sepia 

Nero di seppia 

Bruno di seppia 

From the ink-bag of the cuttle- 1 
fish. Eusepia officinalis. 1 

288 


BROWN 


USE IN PAINTING 

ALTERATION AND RESTORATION 

Xlth century. From close of XVth century to today. Quick- 
drying in oils. 

Tend to darken in oil painting. 

From XVIth century to today. 

Slightly soluble in drying oils and therefore not quite durable. 
Turns grey by alkali (see Bitumen). 

From 1 704 to today. ; 




Not used in the artist’s palette today. Used mainly in the 
XVIIIth and XIXth centuries. English school. 

Soluble in oil, in which dries very slowly. Impermanent. Cracks. 
Restoration: Cracks can somefimes be repaired, using a hot spa- 
tula; sometimes by embedding the finest cigarette paper in the 
sticky impasto. 


Reasonably stable in watercolour only. 


289 


19 





BLACK 


BLACK 


USUAL NAMES 

COMPOSITION 

. i 

USE IN PAINTING 

ALTERATION AND RESTORATION 

English 

...EampUack ' 

French 

Noir de fumee „ 

German 

Lampenschwarz 

Italian 

Nero fumo d’ombra 


— , 


Graphite 

Graphite 

Graphit 



iXIVth-XVth century. 

r 


Ivory Hack 

Noir d'ivoire.. 

f - — 

Eifenbeinschwarz 

Nero d’avorio 


jFrom earliest times, but seems to have been forgotten in the 
middle ages. 


Bone Mack ' ■ 

(Bone brown) 

Noir, animal 

Beinschwarz 

Nero animale 


h - - - - 


Charcoal blacks 

Noir die charbon ani- 
mal 

Kohlenschwarz 





Mineral black 

Noir mineral 

Mineralschwarz 

Nero minerale 

Burnt ochre from foundry. 



GREY 

USUAL NAMES 

COMPOSITION 

1 ■ ' ' 

USE IN PAINTING 

GREY 

ALTERATION AND RESTORATION 

English 

Charcoal grey 

French 

Gris de charbon ani- 
mal 

German 

Kohlengrau 

# ■ 

Italian 



Davy*s grey ■ 

Gris Davy 

Davy’s Gran 


Prepared from slate. 

From early XIXth century. 

Transparent and permanent. 



i 


290 


291 


19 * 














INDEX 

(The fimres^^ier to the sections of the various chapters.) 




Abrasions (of paint layer; retouching), 172. 
Acclimatisation ( of works of art in new sur^^ 
roundings), 90. 

Acetone ( cleaning solvent) , 117. 

Adhesives (lining), 19S. 

Adhesives (transfer), 223. ^ v lei 

Adhesives (treatment of paint layer), 151. 
Adhesives (composition) , 199, 200. 

Adhesives (recipes), 203, 205. 

Ageing (of print layer), 198. 

Air (renewal), 29. 

Air-conditioning, 32, 52, ss. 

Alcohol, ethyl a., methyl a. (cleaning), 117. 
Alcohol (in varnish), 104. 

Amber fresm A 105. 

Assembled on edge (see Cradling). 
Atmospheric conditions, 188. 

Atmospheric pressure, 30. 

Auxiliary Sciences (Restoration), 102. 

Balsams ( types) , 105. 

Balsams (binding medium), 138. 

Bedding (felt b.) (relining), 210. 

Beeswax (adhesive), 139. 

Benzol (cleaning), 117. 

Binding medium (ground), 177 ss., lo4, 
141. 

Binding medium (oil media), 137. 

Binding medium (optical function), 141. 
Binding medium (resinous media), 138. 
Binding medium (wax media), 139. 

Blisters, 148, 150 ss., 180, 181. 

Blisters ( of paint layer and of ground) 4oS# ss. 
Bloom. 108, 140.. 

Bombardment (risk, protection), 83. 

Bulges (of canvas), 194. 

Calcium carbonate, 178. 

Candle smoke (effect on paintings), 411. 
Canvas, 182 ss. 


Canvas ( seasonal expansion and contraction) , 

192. 

Canvas (tension; transfer), 208. 

Canvas ( protection of back) , 193. 

Canvas ( patching) , 195. 

Carbor-disulphide (fumigation), 22M, 

Cardboard (support), 256. 

Casein (ground), 135, 177. 

Changes (in the paint layer), 144 ss. 
Cleaning of paintings (principles), 98 ss. 
Cleaning of showroom, 62. 

Cleaning (dusting), 63. _ ^ 

Cleaning of back of canvus (relining), 213. 
Cleaning of gilt ground, 173 ss. 

Cleaning (halfway), 116 s. 

Cleaning (trial c.), 163. 

Cleavage (of ground), 179. 

Cleavage (of paint layer), 148. 


Colorimetry, 17. 

Cold (effects of c. on varnish), 123. 
Conservation and restoration, 92 ss. 
Constituent parts of paintings (reaction to 
humidity and temperature changes), 43. 
Contraction (irreversible) of wood, 246. 
Consistence (of varnish), 105. 

Concavities (of paint layer), 180. 

Copal, 105. 

Copaiba balsam, 105. 

Crackles (<>/ ground;, 179. t 

Crackles (early c. of paint layer), 14b, 14#. 
Crackles ( of varnish), 110. 

Cracks and crevices (panel), 230 ss. 
Cradling (wood), 235 ss. 

Crystal structure (x-ray analysis), 18, 22. 


Dabbing (cleaning), 99. 
Dammar, 105. 

Darkening of oils, 137. 
Deglazing of varnish layer, 127. 
Decorations (of gallery), 69. 


293 



Dents (in canms), Wi. 

Diluents, 1CI4« ■ 

Disintegration (of canvas), 1S7. 
Disintegration (of Varnish), 109. 

Dulling of varnishes, 125 ss« 

Dusting the picture surface, 63» 

Dust (sutromding atmosphere), 33. 

Egg (Emulsion), 136. 

Electrical plant (showroom), 78. 

Emulsions (media of ground). 111 ss. 
Emulsions (media of paint layer), 136. 
Emulsions ('adhesives; reliningj, 206 ss. 
Ethyl alcohol (cleaning), 117. 

Examination of paintings (methods), 9 ss. 
Examination of the varnish, 115. 

Extinction of fire, 65 ss. 

Fig milk (emulsion), 136. 

Fire (protection), 65 ss. 

(paint layer), 148, 239 ss. 

Flax (linen), 182 ss. 

rame (framing), 58, 59. 

Frescoes (conservation of f. on show), 261. 
Fumes (heating and lighting) , 190 ss. 
Fumigation (panel), 228. 

Fungoid growths (in wood), 226. 

Gaps (treatment), 100 ss. 

Gelatine (varnish), 121. 

Gilding, 173 ss. 

Glazing (protective g.), 57. 

(vegetable, etc.) (medium of paint layer), 

135. 

Glue (medium of ground). 111 ss. 

Glue (relining; formulas), 200 ss. 

Gold ground, 173 ss. 

Golden glow, 102. 

Ground (maladies and treatment), 176 ss. 
Ground ( application of a new g. ; relining), 222. 
Ground /cAun^es due to the g.), 149 ss. 
Gum (binding material of ground), til ss. 
Gypsum (ground), 178. 

Halfway cleaning (varnish), 116. 


Hanging of pictures, 60, 6L 
Heating (of iron or ironing fable; reiining), 
211,212. 

Heating (means), 47 ss., 190, 191. 
Herring-bone (canvas), 184. 

History of Art and Restoration, 97 ss. 
Humidity, 32, 43 ss. 

Humidity (effects on canvas), 185. 
Hygrometric ratio, 26 ss., 54. 

Impurities atmosphere), 33. 

Index of refraction, 25. 

Indra-red rays, 16, 162. 

Insects (wood parasites), 225 ss. 

Interference (deterioration due to previous i.) 
159 ss. 

Ironing (reiining), 211 ss. 

Lead white (ground), 178. 

Light (effects on paintings), 34 ss. 

Light (polarised), 21, 162. 

Lighting ( normal 1. side etc.) ( examination 
of paintings), 9. 

Lighting (during restoration), 162. 

Lightning conductors, 79. 

Linseed oil, 137. 

Magnification (examination of paintings), 10, 

11 . 

Magnifying glass, 10. 

Margin of safety (in using solvents), 120. 
Mastic varnish, 105. 

Metal (support), 259. 

Methods applying to examination, 9 ss., 13 ss. 
Methyl alcohol (cleaning), 117. 

Microchemical examination, 23. 

Microscopy, 19, 21. 

Movement of wood, 229. 

Negative painting (by cleaning, etc.), 116. 

Oil (ground), 177, 178. 

Oil (media), 137. 

Oil (varnish), 

Oxidation (of emulsions), 136. 


294 


THE CONSERVATION OF PAINTINGS 


Oxides of sulphur (surrounding atmosphere), 
33. 

Photographic records, IL 
Plywood (new sappori), 242 ss. 

Plywood (support), 257. 

Photography (means of examination) , 11. 14 ss. 
Photography (stages of cleaning operations), 
168. 

Packing, 84 ss. 

Paint layer (general principles and aims of 
restoration), 131. 

Paint layer ( effect of surrounding atmosphere) , AS. 
Paint layer (structure), 134 ss., 144. 

Paint layer (changes), 145 ss., 149 ss. 

Painting (of showrooms), 69. 

Faper (support), 2M ss> 

Patching (canvas), 195. 

Parasites (wood p.), 225 ss. 

Parchment, 253 ss. 

Petrol, 164, 117, 165. 

Pettenkofer method, 112. 

Pigment, 134. 

Pigments ( old, modern), 142. 

Pigments (stability of p.), 143. 

Polishing of varnish, 123. 

Poppy oil, 137. 

Position of paintings, 189. 

Powderiness (varnish). 111. 

Priming (see : Ground j. 

Priming (effect of humidity on p,), 44. 
Protective measures (atmospheric condition), 
56 . ss. 

Protective layer (varnish), 103 ss. 
Pulverulence ( powderiness ) . 

Pulverisation (of ground), 179. 

Radiology, 14, 162. 

Raising method (paint layer and ground), 154. 
Reagents (microchemical examination), 23. 
Records (photographic), 11, 

Refraction (index of r,), 25. 

Regeneration (of varnish), 112. 

Relining, 196 ss* 

Relining (different from ** Transfer **), 216. 


Removal of varnish, 113 ss. 

Repaint (removal of r.), 164. 

Resins, 165. 

Resins (formulas; varnish), 124. 

Resins ( in the support ; cause of deterioration 
of the paint layer), 157. 

Resins ( synthetic r.==^ polymerised vinyl ace- 
tate), 199. 

Resin (use of r. in adhesive ; ' refining), IBB » 
Resinous media : hard, soft, artificial, 138. 
Restoration (general principles), 92 ss. 
Restoration of the paint layer : principles, 131, 
Restorer (qualifications), 94, 35. 

Restorer’s workshop, 133. 

Restoration documentation, 132. 

Retouching, 176, 171. 

Retouching of gold ground, 175. 

Rupture (of ground), 179. 

Sampling (examination of layers), 26 ss. 
Sandarac, 165. 

Saponified wax, 267. 

Scraping (of repaintings), 166. 

Shellac (varnish), 164, 166. 

Sinking in, 167. 

Smoke (effects of candle s,), 40. 

Spray-gun (dulling with the s.), 128 Ws. 
Spray-gun (varnish), 122. 

Solvents (cleaning), 117. 

Solvents (of varnish), 104. 

Solvents (removal of repaintings), 165. 
Spectrographic examination, 24. 

Staff (housing), 74. 

Stone (support), 260. 

Stoppings (old), 167. 

Store-rooms, 64. 

Stretcher, 186. 

Stretcher (relining), 196 ss. 

Stripping (cleaning), 99. 

Supervision (staff), 80. 

Supports ( reaction to humidity and temperature 
changes), 43. 

Supports (transfer), 217. 

Supports (changes of paint layer due to s,), 
149 ss. 


295 


T, H ^ V A T I O N 0 F P A I M. T I N G S 


Supports fmnbus S5.j, 253 ss. 

Surroundings, 26 ss« 

Rents (in canvas), 194 s. 

Tempera, 135, 136« 

Temperature (of surrounding atmosphere), 

31, 43 ss. 

Temperature (effects on canvas), 185. 
Tension of canvas (seasonal expansion and 
contraction), 192. 

Training of restorers, 95. 

Transfer (relining), 216 ss., 249 ss. 
Transport (and packing), 84 ss. 

Trial Cleaning, 163. 

Turpentine (Venice fj, 105, 205. 

Ultra-violet rays, 15, 115, 162. 

Varnish (composition), 104 ss. 

Varnish (deterioration of paint layer due to 
V. layer), 158 ss. 

Varnish (dulling), 125 ss. 

Varnish (formulas), 124. 

Varnish ( mechanical or aesthetic function of v), 

158. 

Varnish (removal), 99, 113 ss. 


Varnish /at/ersj, I2L 
Varnishes (specific properties), 123® 
Varnishing (methods), 121 ss. 

Vehicle (binding medium), 134 ss. 

Venice turpentine, 105, 205. 

Ventilation, 52. 

Walnut oil, 137. 

Warping (of a panel), 233 ss. 

Water-vapour (hygrometric ratio), 32. 

Wax (saponified; emulsion), 207. 

Wax (beeswax, mineral or paraffin wax) 
(adhesive), 139. 

Wax and resin (adhesive; relining), 199, 204. 
Waxes, 105. 

Wearing off (varnish), 107. 

Wooden supports (maladies and treatment), 

225 ss. 

Workshop (restorers), 133. 

Worm-eaten panels, 227. 

Wrinkling (of paint layer), 137. 

Yellow (varnish turned yellow), 106. 

Yolk (emulsion), 136. 

X-Rays, 14, 162. 

Xylol (cleaning), 117. 






AGHEVlS d’IMPRIMER 

XE SEPT JUIN MIL NEUF CENT QUARANTE 
SUR LES PRESSES 
DE L’IMPRIMERIE UNION 
13 , RITE Ml^CHAIN, PARIS. 


PRINTED IN FRANCE 



